#
# A TIME FOR CHOOSING (The Speech October 27, 1964)
#

Thank you. Thank you very much. Thank you and good evening. The sponsor has been identified, but unlike most television programs, the performer hasn't been provided with a script. As a matter of fact, I have been permitted to choose my own words and discuss my own ideas regarding the choice that we face in the next few weeks. I have spent most of my life as a Democrat. I recently have seen fit to follow another course. I believe that the issues confronting us cross party lines. Now, one side in this campaign has been telling us that the issues of this election are the maintenance of peace and prosperity. The line has been used, "We've never had it so good." But I have an uncomfortable feeling that this prosperity isn't something on which we can base our hopes for the future. No nation in history has ever survived a tax burden that reached a third of its national income. Today, 37 cents out of every dollar earned in this country is the tax collector's share, and yet our government continues to spend 17 million dollars a day more than the government takes in. We haven't balanced our budget 28 out of the last 34 years. We've raised our debt limit three times in the last twelve months, and now our national debt is one and a half times bigger than all the combined debts of all the nations of the world. We have 15 billion dollars in gold in our treasury; we don't own an ounce. Foreign dollar claims are 27.3 billion dollars. And we've just had announced that the dollar of 1939 will now purchase 45 cents in its total value. As for the peace that we would preserve, I wonder who among us would like to approach the wife or mother whose husband or son has died in South Vietnam and ask them if they think this is a peace that should be maintained indefinitely. Do they mean peace, or do they mean we just want to be left in peace? There can be no real peace while one American is dying some place in the world for the rest of us. We're at war with the most dangerous enemy that has ever faced mankind in his long climb from the swamp to the stars, and it's been said if we lose that war, and in so doing lose this way of freedom of ours, history will record with the greatest astonishment that those who had the most to lose did the least to prevent its happening. Well I think it's time we ask ourselves if we still know the freedoms that were intended for us by the Founding Fathers.

Not too long ago, two friends of mine were talking to a Cuban refugee, a businessman who had escaped from Castro, and in the midst of his story one of my friends turned to the other and said, "We don't know how lucky we are." And the Cuban stopped and said, "How lucky you are? I had someplace to escape to." And in that sentence he told us the entire story. If we lose freedom here, there's no place to escape to. This is the last stand on earth.

And this idea that government is beholden to the people, that it has no other source of power except the sovereign people, is still the newest and the most unique idea in all the long history of man's relation to man.

This is the issue of this election: whether we believe in our capacity for self-government or whether we abandon the American revolution and confess that a little intellectual elite in a far-distant capitol can plan our lives for us better than we can plan them ourselves.

You and I are told increasingly we have to choose between a left or right. Well I'd like to suggest there is no such thing as a left or right. There's only an up or down: [up] man's old -- old-aged dream, the ultimate in individual freedom consistent with law and order, or down to the ant heap of totalitarianism. And regardless of their sincerity, their humanitarian motives, those who would trade our freedom for security have embarked on this downward course.

In this vote-harvesting time, they use terms like the "Great Society," or as we were told a few days ago by the President, we must accept a greater government activity in the affairs of the people. But they've been a little more explicit in the past and among themselves; and all of the things I now will quote have appeared in print. These are not Republican accusations. For example, they have voices that say, "The cold war will end through our acceptance of a not undemocratic socialism." Another voice says, "The profit motive has become outmoded. It must be replaced by the incentives of the welfare state." Or, "Our traditional system of individual freedom is incapable of solving the complex problems of the 20th century." Senator Fulbright has said at Stanford University that the Constitution is outmoded. He referred to the President as "our moral teacher and our leader," and he says he is "hobbled in his task by the restrictions of power imposed on him by this antiquated document." He must "be freed," so that he "can do for us" what he knows "is best." And Senator Clark of Pennsylvania, another articulate spokesman, defines liberalism as "meeting the material needs of the masses through the full power of centralized government."

Well, I, for one, resent it when a representative of the people refers to you and me, the free men and women of this country, as "the masses." This is a term we haven't applied to ourselves in America. But beyond that, "the full power of centralized government" -- this was the very thing the Founding Fathers sought to minimize. They knew that governments don't control things. A government can't control the economy without controlling people. And they know when a government sets out to do that, it must use force and coercion to achieve its purpose. They also knew, those Founding Fathers, that outside of its legitimate functions, government does nothing as well or as economically as the private sector of the economy.

Now, we have no better example of this than government's involvement in the farm economy over the last 30 years. Since 1955, the cost of this program has nearly doubled. One-fourth of farming in America is responsible for 85% of the farm surplus. Three-fourths of farming is out on the free market and has known a 21% increase in the per capita consumption of all its produce. You see, that one-fourth of farming -- that's regulated and controlled by the federal government. In the last three years we've spent 43 dollars in the feed grain program for every dollar bushel of corn we don't grow.

Senator Humphrey last week charged that Barry Goldwater, as President, would seek to eliminate farmers. He should do his homework a little better, because he'll find out that we've had a decline of 5 million in the farm population under these government programs. He'll also find that the Democratic administration has sought to get from Congress [an] extension of the farm program to include that three-fourths that is now free. He'll find that they've also asked for the right to imprison farmers who wouldn't keep books as prescribed by the federal government. The Secretary of Agriculture asked for the right to seize farms through condemnation and resell them to other individuals. And contained in that same program was a provision that would have allowed the federal government to remove 2 million farmers from the soil.

At the same time, there's been an increase in the Department of Agriculture employees. There's now one for every 30 farms in the United States, and still they can't tell us how 66 shiploads of grain headed for Austria disappeared without a trace and Billie Sol Estes never left shore.

Every responsible farmer and farm organization has repeatedly asked the government to free the farm economy, but how -- who are farmers to know what's best for them? The wheat farmers voted against a wheat program. The government passed it anyway. Now the price of bread goes up; the price of wheat to the farmer goes down.

Meanwhile, back in the city, under urban renewal the assault on freedom carries on. Private property rights [are] so diluted that public interest is almost anything a few government planners decide it should be. In a program that takes from the needy and gives to the greedy, we see such spectacles as in Cleveland, Ohio, a million-and-a-half-dollar building completed only three years ago must be destroyed to make way for what government officials call a "more compatible use of the land." The President tells us he's now going to start building public housing units in the thousands, where heretofore we've only built them in the hundreds. But FHA [Federal Housing Authority] and the Veterans Administration tell us they have 120,000 housing units they've taken back through mortgage foreclosure. For three decades, we've sought to solve the problems of unemployment through government planning, and the more the plans fail, the more the planners plan. The latest is the Area Redevelopment Agency.

They've just declared Rice County, Kansas, a depressed area. Rice County, Kansas, has two hundred oil wells, and the 14,000 people there have over 30 million dollars on deposit in personal savings in their banks. And when the government tells you you're depressed, lie down and be depressed.

We have so many people who can't see a fat man standing beside a thin one without coming to the conclusion the fat man got that way by taking advantage of the thin one. So they're going to solve all the problems of human misery through government and government planning. Well, now, if government planning and welfare had the answer -- and they've had almost 30 years of it -- shouldn't we expect government to read the score to us once in a while? Shouldn't they be telling us about the decline each year in the number of people needing help? The reduction in the need for public housing?

But the reverse is true. Each year the need grows greater; the program grows greater. We were told four years ago that 17 million people went to bed hungry each night. Well that was probably true. They were all on a diet. But now we're told that 9.3 million families in this country are poverty-stricken on the basis of earning less than 3,000 dollars a year. Welfare spending [is] 10 times greater than in the dark depths of the Depression. We're spending 45 billion dollars on welfare. Now do a little arithmetic, and you'll find that if we divided the 45 billion dollars up equally among those 9 million poor families, we'd be able to give each family 4,600 dollars a year. And this added to their present income should eliminate poverty. Direct aid to the poor, however, is only running only about 600 dollars per family. It would seem that someplace there must be some overhead.

Now -- so now we declare "war on poverty," or "You, too, can be a Bobby Baker." Now do they honestly expect us to believe that if we add 1 billion dollars to the 45 billion we're spending, one more program to the 30-odd we have -- and remember, this new program doesn't replace any, it just duplicates existing programs -- do they believe that poverty is suddenly going to disappear by magic? Well, in all fairness I should explain there is one part of the new program that isn't duplicated. This is the youth feature. We're now going to solve the dropout problem, juvenile delinquency, by reinstituting something like the old CCC camps [Civilian Conservation Corps], and we're going to put our young people in these camps. But again we do some arithmetic, and we find that we're going to spend each year just on room and board for each young person we help 4,700 dollars a year. We can send them to Harvard for 2,700! Course, don't get me wrong. I'm not suggesting Harvard is the answer to juvenile delinquency.

But seriously, what are we doing to those we seek to help? Not too long ago, a judge called me here in Los Angeles. He told me of a young woman who'd come before him for a divorce. She had six children, was pregnant with her seventh. Under his questioning, she revealed her husband was a laborer earning 250 dollars a month. She wanted a divorce to get an 80 dollar raise. She's eligible for 330 dollars a month in the Aid to Dependent Children Program. She got the idea from two women in her neighborhood who'd already done that very thing.

Yet anytime you and I question the schemes of the do-gooders, we're denounced as being against their humanitarian goals. They say we're always "against" things -- we're never "for" anything.

Well, the trouble with our liberal friends is not that they're ignorant; it's just that they know so much that isn't so.

Now -- we're for a provision that destitution should not follow unemployment by reason of old age, and to that end we've accepted Social Security as a step toward meeting the problem.

But we're against those entrusted with this program when they practice deception regarding its fiscal shortcomings, when they charge that any criticism of the program means that we want to end payments to those people who depend on them for a livelihood. They've called it "insurance" to us in a hundred million pieces of literature. But then they appeared before the Supreme Court and they testified it was a welfare program. They only use the term "insurance" to sell it to the people. And they said Social Security dues are a tax for the general use of the government, and the government has used that tax. There is no fund, because Robert Byers, the actuarial head, appeared before a congressional committee and admitted that Social Security as of this moment is 298 billion dollars in the hole. But he said there should be no cause for worry because as long as they have the power to tax, they could always take away from the people whatever they needed to bail them out of trouble. And they're doing just that.

A young man, 21 years of age, working at an average salary -- his Social Security contribution would, in the open market, buy him an insurance policy that would guarantee 220 dollars a month at age 65. The government promises 127. He could live it up until he's 31 and then take out a policy that would pay more than Social Security. Now are we so lacking in business sense that we can't put this program on a sound basis, so that people who do require those payments will find they can get them when they're due -- that the cupboard isn't bare?

Barry Goldwater thinks we can.

At the same time, can't we introduce voluntary features that would permit a citizen who can do better on his own to be excused upon presentation of evidence that he had made provision for the non-earning years? Should we not allow a widow with children to work, and not lose the benefits supposedly paid for by her deceased husband? Shouldn't you and I be allowed to declare who our beneficiaries will be under this program, which we cannot do? I think we're for telling our senior citizens that no one in this country should be denied medical care because of a lack of funds. But I think we're against forcing all citizens, regardless of need, into a compulsory government program, especially when we have such examples, as was announced last week, when France admitted that their Medicare program is now bankrupt. They've come to the end of the road.

In addition, was Barry Goldwater so irresponsible when he suggested that our government give up its program of deliberate, planned inflation, so that when you do get your Social Security pension, a dollar will buy a dollar's worth, and not 45 cents worth?

I think we're for an international organization, where the nations of the world can seek peace. But I think we're against subordinating American interests to an organization that has become so structurally unsound that today you can muster a two-thirds vote on the floor of the General Assembly among nations that represent less than 10 percent of the world's population. I think we're against the hypocrisy of assailing our allies because here and there they cling to a colony, while we engage in a conspiracy of silence and never open our mouths about the millions of people enslaved in the Soviet colonies in the satellite nations.

I think we're for aiding our allies by sharing of our material blessings with those nations which share in our fundamental beliefs, but we're against doling out money government to government, creating bureaucracy, if not socialism, all over the world. We set out to help 19 countries. We're helping 107. We've spent 146 billion dollars. With that money, we bought a 2 million dollar yacht for Haile Selassie. We bought dress suits for Greek undertakers, extra wives for Kenya[n] government officials. We bought a thousand TV sets for a place where they have no electricity. In the last six years, 52 nations have bought 7 billion dollars worth of our gold, and all 52 are receiving foreign aid from this country.

No government ever voluntarily reduces itself in size. So, governments' programs, once launched, never disappear.

Actually, a government bureau is the nearest thing to eternal life we'll ever see on this earth.

Federal employees -- federal employees number two and a half million; and federal, state, and local, one out of six of the nation's work force employed by government. These proliferating bureaus with their thousands of regulations have cost us many of our constitutional safeguards. How many of us realize that today federal agents can invade a man's property without a warrant? They can impose a fine without a formal hearing, let alone a trial by jury? And they can seize and sell his property at auction to enforce the payment of that fine. In Chico County, Arkansas, James Wier over-planted his rice allotment. The government obtained a 17,000 dollar judgment. And a U.S. marshal sold his 960-acre farm at auction. The government said it was necessary as a warning to others to make the system work.

Last February 19th at the University of Minnesota, Norman Thomas, six-times candidate for President on the Socialist Party ticket, said, "If Barry Goldwater became President, he would stop the advance of socialism in the United States." I think that's exactly what he will do.

But as a former Democrat, I can tell you Norman Thomas isn't the only man who has drawn this parallel to socialism with the present administration, because back in 1936, Mr. Democrat himself, Al Smith, the great American, came before the American people and charged that the leadership of his Party was taking the Party of Jefferson, Jackson, and Cleveland down the road under the banners of Marx, Lenin, and Stalin. And he walked away from his Party, and he never returned til the day he died -- because to this day, the leadership of that Party has been taking that Party, that honorable Party, down the road in the image of the labor Socialist Party of England.

Now it doesn't require expropriation or confiscation of private property or business to impose socialism on a people. What does it mean whether you hold the deed to the -- or the title to your business or property if the government holds the power of life and death over that business or property? And such machinery already exists. The government can find some charge to bring against any concern it chooses to prosecute. Every businessman has his own tale of harassment. Somewhere a perversion has taken place. Our natural, unalienable rights are now considered to be a dispensation of government, and freedom has never been so fragile, so close to slipping from our grasp as it is at this moment.

Our Democratic opponents seem unwilling to debate these issues. They want to make you and I believe that this is a contest between two men -- that we're to choose just between two personalities.

Well what of this man that they would destroy -- and in destroying, they would destroy that which he represents, the ideas that you and I hold dear? Is he the brash and shallow and trigger-happy man they say he is? Well I've been privileged to know him "when." I knew him long before he ever dreamed of trying for high office, and I can tell you personally I've never known a man in my life I believed so incapable of doing a dishonest or dishonorable thing.

This is a man who, in his own business before he entered politics, instituted a profit-sharing plan before unions had ever thought of it. He put in health and medical insurance for all his employees. He took 50 percent of the profits before taxes and set up a retirement program, a pension plan for all his employees. He sent monthly checks for life to an employee who was ill and couldn't work. He provides nursing care for the children of mothers who work in the stores. When Mexico was ravaged by the floods in the Rio Grande, he climbed in his airplane and flew medicine and supplies down there.

An ex-GI told me how he met him. It was the week before Christmas during the Korean War, and he was at the Los Angeles airport trying to get a ride home to Arizona for Christmas. And he said that [there were] a lot of servicemen there and no seats available on the planes. And then a voice came over the loudspeaker and said, "Any men in uniform wanting a ride to Arizona, go to runway such-and-such," and they went down there, and there was a fellow named Barry Goldwater sitting in his plane. Every day in those weeks before Christmas, all day long, he'd load up the plane, fly it to Arizona, fly them to their homes, fly back over to get another load.

During the hectic split-second timing of a campaign, this is a man who took time out to sit beside an old friend who was dying of cancer. His campaign managers were understandably impatient, but he said, "There aren't many left who care what happens to her. I'd like her to know I care." This is a man who said to his 19-year-old son, "There is no foundation like the rock of honesty and fairness, and when you begin to build your life on that rock, with the cement of the faith in God that you have, then you have a real start." This is not a man who could carelessly send other people's sons to war. And that is the issue of this campaign that makes all the other problems I've discussed academic, unless we realize we're in a war that must be won.
Those who would trade our freedom for the soup kitchen of the welfare state have told us they have a utopian solution of peace without victory. They call their policy "accommodation." And they say if we'll only avoid any direct confrontation with the enemy, he'll forget his evil ways and learn to love us. All who oppose them are indicted as warmongers. They say we offer simple answers to complex problems. Well, perhaps there is a simple answer -- not an easy answer -- but simple: If you and I have the courage to tell our elected officials that we want our national policy based on what we know in our hearts is morally right.

We cannot buy our security, our freedom from the threat of the bomb by committing an immorality so great as saying to a billion human beings now enslaved behind the Iron Curtain, "Give up your dreams of freedom because to save our own skins, we're willing to make a deal with your slave masters." Alexander Hamilton said, "A nation which can prefer disgrace to danger is prepared for a master, and deserves one." Now let's set the record straight. There's no argument over the choice between peace and war, but there's only one guaranteed way you can have peace -- and you can have it in the next second -- surrender.

Admittedly, there's a risk in any course we follow other than this, but every lesson of history tells us that the greater risk lies in appeasement, and this is the specter our well-meaning liberal friends refuse to face -- that their policy of accommodation is appeasement, and it gives no choice between peace and war, only between fight or surrender. If we continue to accommodate, continue to back and retreat, eventually we have to face the final demand -- the ultimatum. And what then -- when Nikita Khrushchev has told his people he knows what our answer will be? He has told them that we're retreating under the pressure of the Cold War, and someday when the time comes to deliver the final ultimatum, our surrender will be voluntary, because by that time we will have been weakened from within spiritually, morally, and economically. He believes this because from our side he's heard voices pleading for "peace at any price" or "better Red than dead," or as one commentator put it, he'd rather "live on his knees than die on his feet." And therein lies the road to war, because those voices don't speak for the rest of us.

You and I know and do not believe that life is so dear and peace so sweet as to be purchased at the price of chains and slavery. If nothing in life is worth dying for, when did this begin -- just in the face of this enemy? Or should Moses have told the children of Israel to live in slavery under the pharaohs? Should Christ have refused the cross? Should the patriots at Concord Bridge have thrown down their guns and refused to fire the shot heard 'round the world? The martyrs of history were not fools, and our honored dead who gave their lives to stop the advance of the Nazis didn't die in vain. Where, then, is the road to peace? Well it's a simple answer after all.

You and I have the courage to say to our enemies, "There is a price we will not pay." "There is a point beyond which they must not advance." And this -- this is the meaning in the phrase of Barry Goldwater's "peace through strength." Winston Churchill said, "The destiny of man is not measured by material computations. When great forces are on the move in the world, we learn we're spirits -- not animals." And he said, "There's something going on in time and space, and beyond time and space, which, whether we like it or not, spells duty."

You and I have a rendezvous with destiny.

We'll preserve for our children this, the last best hope of man on earth, or we'll sentence them to take the last step into a thousand years of darkness.

We will keep in mind and remember that Barry Goldwater has faith in us. He has faith that you and I have the ability and the dignity and the right to make our own decisions and determine our own destiny.

Thank you very much.

#
#RONALD REAGAN ANNOUNCEMENT FOR PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDACY
#

Thank you for coming.

I have called this press conference to announce that I am a candidate for the Presidency and to ask for the support of all Americans who share my belief that our nation needs to embark on a new, constructive course. I believe my candidacy will be healthy for the nation and my party.

 I am running because I have grown increasingly concerned about the course of events in the United States and in the world.

In just a few years, three vital measures of economic decay—inflation, unemployment, and interest rates—have more than doubled, at times reaching 10 percent and even more.

Government at all levels now absorbs more than 44 percent of our personal income.  It has become more intrusive, more coercive, more meddlesome and less effective. Our access to cheap and abundant energy has been interrupted, and our dependence on foreign sources is growing. A decade ago we had military superiority.  Today we are in danger of being surpassed by a nation that has never made an effort to hide its hostility to everything we stand for.

Through détente we have sought peace with our adversaries.  We should continue to do so but must make it plain that we expect a stronger indication that they also seek a lasting peace with us.

In my opinion, the root of these problems lies right here—in Washington, D.C.  Our nation’s capital has become the seat of a “buddy” system that functions for its own benefit—increasingly insensitive to the needs of the American worker who supports it with his taxes.

Today it is difficult to find leaders who are independent of the forces that have brought us our problems—the Congress, the bureaucracy, the lobbyist, big business and big labor.

If America is to survive and go forward, this must change.  It will only change when the American people vote for a leadership that listens to them, relies on them and seeks to return government to them. We need a government that is confident not of what it can do, but of what the people can do.

For eight years in California, we labored to make government responsive.  We worked against high odds—an opposition legislature for most of those years and an obstructive Washington bureaucracy for all of them.  We did not always succeed.  Nevertheless, we found that fiscal responsibility is possible, that the welfare rolls can come down, that social problems can be met below the Federal level.

In the coming months I will take this message to the American people.  I will talk in detail about responsible, responsive government.  I will tell the people it is they who should decide how much government they want.

I don’t believe for one moment that four more years of business-as-usual in Washington is the answer to our problems, and I don’t think the American people believe it either.

We, as a people, aren’t happy if we are not moving forward.  A nation that is growing and thriving is one which will solve its problems. We must offer progress instead of stagnation; the truth instead of promises; hope and faith instead of defeatism and despair.  Then, I am sure, the people will make those decisions which will restore confidence in our way of life and release that energy that is the American spirit.

#
#To Restore America, Ronald Reagan's Campaign Address
#

Good evening to all of you from California. Tonight, Id like to talk to you about issues. Issues which I think are involvedor should be involved in this primary election season. Im a candidate for the Republican nomination for president. But I hope that you who are Independents and Democrats will let me talk to you also tonight because the problems facing our country are problems that just dont bear any party label.

In this election season the White House is telling us a solid economic recovery is taking place. It claims a slight drop in unemployment. It says that prices arent going up as fast, but they are still going up, and that the stock market has shown some gains. But, in fact, things seem just about as they were back in the 1972 election year. Remember, we were also coming out of a recession then. Inflation had been running at round 6 percent. Unemployment about 7 (percent). Remember, too, the upsurge and the optimism lasted through the election year and into 1973. And then the roof fell in. Once again we had unemployment. Only this time not 7 percent, more than 10. And inflation wasnt 6 percent, it was 12 percent. Now, in this election year 1976, were told were coming out of this recession just because inflation and unemployment rates have fallen, to what they were at the worst of the previous recession. If history repeats itself, will we be talking recovery four years from now merely because weve reduced inflation from 25 percent to 12 percent?

The fact is, well never build a lasting economic recovery by going deeper into debt at a faster rate than we ever have before. It took this nation 166 years until the middle of World War II to finally accumulate a debt of $95 billion. It took this administration just the last 12 months to add $95 billion to the debt. And this administration has run up almost one-fourth of the total national debt in just these short 19 months.

Inflation is the cause of recession and unemployment. And were not going to have real prosperity or recovery until we stop fighting the symptoms and start fighting the disease. Theres only one cause for inflation- government spending more than government takes in. The cure is a balanced budget. Ah, but they tell us, 80 percent of the budget is uncontrollable. Its fixed by laws passed by Congress. Well, laws passed by Congress can be repealed by Congress. And, if Congress is unwilling to do this, then isnt it time we elect a Congress that will?

Soon after he took office, Mr. Ford promised he would end inflation. Indeed, he declared war on inflation. And, we all donned those WIN buttons to Whip Inflation Now. Unfortunately the war if it ever really started was soon over. Mr. Ford without WIN button, appeared on TV, and promised he absolutely would not allow the Federal deficit to exceed $60 billion (which incidentally was $5 billion more than the biggest previous deficit wed ever had). Later he told us it might be as much as $70 billion. Now we learn its 80 billion or more.

Then came a White House proposal for a $28 billion tax cut, to be matched by a $28 billion cut in the proposed spending not in present spending, but in the proposed spending in the new budget. Well, my question then and my question now is, if there was $28 billion in the new budget that could be cut, what was it doing there in the first place?

Unfortunately, Washington doesnt feel the same pain from inflation that you and I do. As a matter of fact, government makes a profit on inflation. For instance, last July Congress vaccinated itself against that pain. It very quietly passed legislation (which the president signed into law) which automatically now gives a pay increase to every Congressman every time the cost of living goes up.

It would have been nice if theyd thought of some arrangement like that for the rest of us. They could, for example, correct a great unfairness that now exists in our tax system. Today, when you get a cost of living pay raise one that just keeps you even with purchasing power it often moves you up into a higher tax bracket. This means you pay a higher percentage in tax, but you reduce your purchasing power. Last year, because of this inequity, the government took in $7 billion in undeserved profit in the income tax alone, and this year theyll do even better.

Now isnt it time that Congress looked after your welfare as well as its own? Those whose spending policies cause inflation to begin with should be made to fee the painful effect just as you and I do.

Repeal of Congresss automatic pay raise might leave it with more incentive to do something to curb inflation. Now, lets look at Social Security. Mr. Ford says he wants to preserve the integrity of Social Security. Well, I differ with him on one world. I would like to restore the integrity of Social Security. Those who depend on it see a continual reduction in their standard of living. Inflation strips the increase in their benefits. The maximum benefit today buys 80 fewer loaves of bread than it did when that maximum payment was only $85 a month. In the meantime, the Social Security payroll tax has become the most unfair tax any worker pays. Women are discriminated against, particularly working wives. And, people who reach Social Security age and want to continue working, should be allowed to do so without losing their benefits. I believe a presidential commission of experts should be appointed to study and present a plan to strengthen and improve Social Security while theres still time so that no person who has contributed to Social Security will ever lose a dime.

Before leaving this subject of our economic problems, lets talk about unemployment. Ending inflation is the only long range and lasting answer to the problem of unemployment. The Washington Establishment is not the answer. Its the problem. Is tax policies, its harassing regulation, its confiscation of investment capital to pay for its deficits keeps business and industry from expanding to meet your needs and to provide the jobs we all need.

No one who lived through the Great Depression can ever look upon an unemployed person with anything by compassion. To me, there is no greater tragedy than a breadwinner willing to work, with a job skill but unable to find a market for that job skill. Back in those dark depression days I saw my father on Christmas eve open what he thought was a Christmas greeting from his boss. Instead, it was the blue slip telling him he not longer had a job. The memory of him sitting there holding that slip of paper and then saying in a half whisper, Thats quite a Christmas present; it will stay with me as long as I live.

Other problems go unsolved. Take energy. Only a short time ago we were lined up at the gas station turned our thermostats down as Washington announced project Independence. We were going to become self-sufficient, able to provide for our own energy needs. At the time, we were only importing a small percentage of our oil. Yet, the Arab boycott caused half a million Americans to lose their jobs when plants closed down for lack of fuel. Today, its almost three years later and Project Independence has become Project Dependence. Congress has adopted an energy bill so bad we were led to believe Mr. Ford would veto it. Instead, he signed it. And, almost instantly, drilling rigs all over our land started shutting down. Now for the first time in our history we are importing more oil than we produce. How many Americans will be laid off if theres another boycott? The energy bill is a disaster that never should have been signed.

An effort has been made in this campaign to suggest that there arent any real differences between Mr. Ford and myself. Well, I believe there are and these differences are fundamental. One of them has to do with our approach to government. Before Richard Nixon appointed him Vice President, Mr. Ford was a Congressman for 25 years. His concern, of necessity, was the welfare of his congressional district. For most of his adult life he has been a part of the Washington Establishment. Most of my adult life has been spent outside of government. My experience in government was the eight years I served as governor of California. If it were a nation, California would be the 7th-ranking economic power in the world today.

When I became governor, I inherited a state government that was in almost the same situation as New York City. The state payroll had been growing for a dozen years at a rate of from five to seven thousand new employees each year. State government was spending from a million to a million-and-a-half dollars more each day than it was taking in. The States great water project was unfinished and under-funded by a half a billion dollars. My predecessor had spent the entire years budget for Medicaid in the first six months of the fiscal year. And, we learned that the teachers retirement fund was unfunded a $4 billion liability hanging over every property owner in the state. I didnt know whether Id been elected governor or appointed receiver. California was faced with insolvency and on the verge of bankruptcy. We had to increase taxes. Well, this came very hard for me because I felt taxes were already too great a burden. I told the people the increase in my mind was temporary and that, as soon as we could, wed return their money to them.

I had never in my life thought of seeking or holding public of office and Im still not quite sure how it all happened. In my own mind, I was a citizen representing my fellow citizens against the institution of government. I turned to the people, not to politicians, for help. Instead of a committee to screen applicants for jobs, I had a citizens recruiting committee, and I told this committee I wanted an administration made up of men and women who did not want government careers and whod be the first to tell me if their government job was unnecessary. And I had that happen. [A] young man from the aerospace industry dissolved his department in four months, handed me the key to this office, and told me wed never needed the department. And to this day, I not only have never missed it I dont know where it was.

There was a reason for my seeking people who didnt want government careers. Dr. Parkinson summed it all up in his book on bureaucracy. He said, Government hires a rat-catcher and the first thing you know, hes become a rodent control officer. In those entire eight years, most of us never lost that feeling that we were there representing the people against what Cicero once called the arrogance of officialdom. We had a kind of watchword we used on each other. When we begin thinking of government as we instead of they, weve been here too long. Well, I believe that attitude would be beneficial in Washington.

We didnt stop just with getting our administration from the ranks of the people. We also asked for help from expert people in a great many fields, and more than 250 of our citizens volunteered to form into task forces. They went into every department and agency of state government to see how modern business practices could make government more efficient, economical and responsive. The gave an average of 117 days apiece full time, away from their own jobs and careers at no cost to the taxpayers. They made eighteen hundred specific recommendations. We implemented more than sixteen hundred of those recommendations.

This was government-by-the-people, proving that it works when the people work at it. When we ended our eight years, we turned over to the incoming administration a balanced budget, a $500 million surplus, and virtually the same number of employees wed stated with eight years before even though the increase in population had given some departments a two-thirds increase in work load. The water project was completed with $165 million left over. Our bonds had a triple A rating, the highest credit rating you can get. And the teachers retirement program was fully funded on a sound actuarial basis. And, we kept our word to the taxpayers we returned to them in rebates and tax cuts, $5 billion, $761 million.

I believe that what we did in California can be done in Washington if government will have faith in the people and let them bring their common sense to bear on the problems bureaucracy hasnt solved. I believe in the people. Now, Mr. Ford places his faith in the Washington Establishment. This has been evident in his appointment of former Congressmen and longtime government workers to positions in his Administration. Well, I dont believe that those who have been part of the problem are necessarily the best qualified to solve those problems.

The truth is, Washington has taken over functions that dont truly belong to it. In almost every case it has been a failure. Now, understand, Im speaking of those programs which logically should be administered at state and local levels. Welfare is a classic example. Voices that are raised now and then urging a federalization of welfare dont realize that the failure of welfare is due to federal interference. Washington doesnt even know how many people are on welfare how many cheaters are getting more than one check. It only knows how many checks its sending out. Its own rules keep it from finding out how many are getting more than one check.

Well, California had a welfare problem. Sixteen percent of all welfare recipients in the country were drawing their checks in our state. We were sending welfare checks to families who decided to live abroad. On family was receiving its check in Russia. Our caseload was increasing by 40,000 people a month. Well, after a few years of trying to control this runaway program and being frustrated by bureaucrats here in California and in Washington, we turned again to a citizens task force. The result was the most comprehensive welfare reform ever attempted. And in less than three years we reduced the rolls by more than 300,000 people, saved the taxpayers $2 billion, and increased the grants to the truly deserving needy by an average of 43 percent. We also carried out a successful experiment which I believe is an answer to much of the welfare problem in the nation. We put able-bodied welfare recipients to work at useful community projects in return for their welfare grants.

Now, lets look at housing. Washington has tried to solve this problem for the poor by building low-cost houses. So far its torn down three and a half homes for every one its built.

Schools in America we created at the local level and administered at the local level for many years the greatest public school system in the world. Now through something called federal aid to education, we have something called federal interference, and education has been the loser. Quality has declined as federal intervention has increased. Nothing has created more bitterness, for example, than forced busing to achieve racial balance. It was born of a hope that we could increase understanding and reduce prejudice and antagonism. And Im sure we all approved of that goal. But busing has failed to achieve the goal. Instead, it has increased the bitterness and animosity it was supposed to reduce. Californias Superintendent of Public Instruction, Wilson Riles (himself a Black), says The concept that Black children cant learn unless they are sitting with white children is utter and complete nonsense. Well, I agree. The money now being wasted on this social experiment could be better spent to provide the kind of school facilities every child deserves. Forced busing should be ended by legislation if possible by constitutional amendment if necessary. And, control of education should be returned to local school districts.

The other day Mr. Ford came out against gun control. But back in Washington, D.C., his Attorney General has proposed a seven-point program that amounts to just that: gun control. I dont think that making it difficult for law-abiding citizens to obtain guns will lower the crime rate - not when the criminals will always find a way to get them. In California I think we found an answer. We put into law what is practical gun control. Anyone convicted of having a gun in his possession while he committed a crime: add five to fifteen years to the prison sentence.

Sometimes bureaucracys excesses are so great that we laugh at them. But they are costly laughs. Twenty-five years ago the Hoover Commission discovered that Washington files a million reports a year just reporting there is nothing to report. Independent business people, shopkeepers and farmers file billions of reports every year required of them by Washington. It amounts to some 10 billion pieces of paper each year, and it adds $50 billion a year to the cost of doing business. Now, Washington has been loud in its promise to do something about this blizzard of paperwork. And they made good. Last year they increased it by 20 percent.

But there is one problem which must be solved or everything else is meaningless. I am speaking of the problem of our national security. Our nation is in danger, and the danger grows greater with each passing day. Like an echo from the past, the voice of Winston Churchills grandson was heard recently in Britains House of Commons warning that the spread of totalitarianism threatens the world once again the democracies are wandering without aim.

Wandering without aim describes the United States foreign policy. Angola is a case in point. We gave just enough support to one side to encourage it to fight and die, but too little to give them a chance of winning. And while were disliked by the winner, distrusted by the loser, and viewed by the world as weak and unsure. If dente were the two-way street its supposed to be, we could have told the Soviet Union to stop its trouble-making and leave Angola to the Angolans. But it didnt work out that way.

Now, we are told Washington is dropping the word dente, but keeping the policy. But whatever its called, the policy is whats at fault. What is our policy? Mr. Fords new Ambassador to the United Nations attacks our longtime ally, Israel. In Asia, our new relationship with mainland China can have practical benefits for both sides. But that doesnt mean it should include yielding to demands by them, as the administration has, to reduce our military presence on Taiwan where we have a longtime friend and ally, the Republic of China.

And, its also revealed now that we seek to establish friendly relations with Hanoi. To make it more palatable, were told that this might help us learn the fate of the men still listed as Missing in Action. Well, theres no doubt our government has an obligation to end the agony of parents, wives and children whove lived so long with uncertainty. But, this should have been one of our first demands of Hanois patron saint, the Soviet Union, if dente had any meaning at all. To present it now as a reason for friendship with those who have already violated their promise to provide such information is hypocrisy.

In the last few days, Mr. Ford and Dr. Kissinger had taken us from hinting at invasion of Cuba, to laughing it off as a ridiculous idea. Except, that it was their ridiculous idea. No one else suggested it. Once again what is their policy? During this last year, they carried on a campaign to befriend Castro. They persuaded the Organization of American States to lift its trade embargo, lifted some of the U.S. trade restrictions. They engaged in cultural exchanges. And then, on the eve of the Florida primary election, Mr. Ford went to Florida, called Castro an outlaw and said hed never recognize him. But he hasnt asked our Latin American neighbors to reimpose a single sanction, nor has he taken any action himself. Meanwhile, Castro continues to export revolution to Puerto Rico, to Angola, and who knows where else?

As I talk to you tonight, negotiations with another dictator go forward negotiations aimed at giving up our ownership of the Panama Canal Zone. Apparently, everyone knows about this except the rightful owners of the Canal Zone you, the people of the United States. General Omar Torrijos, the dictator of Panama, seized power eight years ago by ousting the duly-elected government. There have been no elections since. No civil liberties. The press is censored. Torrijos is a friend and ally of Castro and, like him, is pro-Communist. He threatens sabotage and guerrilla attacks on our installations if we dont yield to his demands. His foreign minister openly claims that we have already agreed in principle to giving up the Canal Zone.

Well, the Canal Zone is not a colonial possession. It is not a long-term lease. It is sovereign United States Territory every bit the same as Alaska and all the states that were carved from the Louisiana Purchase. We should end those negotiations and tell the General: We bought it, we paid for it, we built it, and we intend to keep it.

Mr. Ford says dente will be replaced by peace through strength. Well now, that slogan has a a nice ring to it, but neither Mr. Ford nor his new Secretary of Defense will say that our strength is superior to all others. In one of the dark hours of the Great Depression, Franklin Delano Roosevelt said, It is time to speak the truth frankly and boldly. Well, I believe former Secretary of Defense James Schlesinger was trying to speak the truth frankly and boldly to his fellow citizens. And thats why he is no longer Secretary of Defense.

The Soviet Army outnumbers ours more than two-to-one and in reserves four-to-one. They out-spend us on weapons by 50 percent. Their Navy outnumbers ours in surface ships and submarines two-to-one. Were outgunned in artillery three-to-one and their tanks outnumber ours four-to-one. Their strategic nuclear missiles are larger, more powerful and more numerous than ours. The evidence mounts that we are Number Two in a world where its dangerous, if not fatal, to be second best. Is this why Mr. Ford refused to invite Alexander Solzhenitsyn to the White House? Or, why Mr. Ford traveled halfway round the world to sign the Helsinki Pact, putting our stamp of approval on Russias enslavement of the captive nations? We gave away the freedom of millions of people freedom that was not ours to give.

Now we must ask if someone is giving away our own freedom. Dr. Kissinger is quoted as saying that he thinks of the United States as Athens and the Soviet Union as Sparta. The day of the U.S. is past and today if the day of the Soviet Union. And he added, My Job as Secretary of State is to negotiate the most acceptable second-best position available. Well, I believe in the peace of which Mr. Ford spoke as much as any man. But peace does not come from weakness or from retreat. It comes from the restoration of American military superiority.

Ask the people of Latvia, Estonia, Lithuania, Czechoslovakia, Poland, Hungary all the others: East Germany, Bulgaria, Romania ask them what its like to live in a world where the Soviet Union is Number One. I dont want to live in that kind of world; and I dont think you do either. Now we learn that another high official of the State Department, Helmut Sonnenfeldt, whom Dr. Kissinger refers to as his Kissinger, has expressed the belief that, in effect, the captive nations should give up any claim of national sovereignty and simply become part of the Soviet Union. He says, their desire to break out of the Soviet straightjacket threatens us with World War III. In other words, slaves should accept their fate.

Well, I dont believe the people Ive met in almost every State of this Union are ready to consign this, the last island of freedom, to the dust bin of history, along with the bones of dead civilizations of the past. Call it mysticism, it you will, but I believe God had a divine purpose in placing this land between the two great oceans to be found by those who had a special love of freedom and the courage to leave the countries of their birth. From our forefathers to our modern-day immigrants, weve come from every corner of the earth, from every race and every ethnic background, and weve become a new breed in the world. Were Americans and we have a rendezvous with destiny. We spread across this land, building farms and towns and cities, and we did it without any federal land planning program or urban renewal.

Indeed, we gave birth to an entirely new concept in mans relation to man. We created government as our servant, beholden to us and possessing no powers except those voluntarily granted to it by us. Now a self-anointed elite in our nations capital would have us believe we are incapable of guiding our own destiny. They practice government by mystery, telling us its too complex for our understanding. Believing this, they assume we might panic if we were to be told the truth about our problems.

Why should we become frightened? No people who have ever lived on this earth have fought harder, paid a higher price for freedom, or done more to advance the dignity of man than the living Americans the Americans living in this land today. There isnt any problem we cant solve if government will give us the facts. Tell us what needs to be done. Then, get out of the way and let us have at it.

Recently on one of my campaign trips I was doing a question-and-answer session, and suddenly I received a question from a little girl couldnt have been over six or seven years old standing in the very front row. Id heard the question before but somehow in her asking it, she threw me a little bit. She said, why do you want to be president? Well, I tried to tell her about giving government back to the people; I tried to tell her about turning authority back to the states and local communities, and so forth; winding down the bureaucracy. [It] might have been an answer for adults, but I knew that it wasnt what that little girl wanted, and I left very frustrated. It was on the way to the next stop that I turned to Nancy and I said I wish I had it to do over again because I Id like to answer her question.

Well, maybe I can answer it now. I would like to go to Washington. I would like to be president, because I would like to see this country become once again a country where a little six-year old girl can grow up knowing the same freedom that I knew when I was six years old, growing up in America. If this is the America you want for yourself and your children; if you want to restore government not only of and for but by the people; to see the American spirit unleashed once again. To make this land a shining, golden hope God intended it to be, Id like to hear from you. Write, or send a wire. Id be proud to hear your thoughts and your ideas.

Thank you, and good night.

#
#Republican National Convention Speech
#

Mr. President, Mrs. Ford, Mr. Vice President, Mr. Vice President-to-be, the distinguished guests here, you ladies and gentlemen. I was going to say fellow Republicans here but those who are watching from a distance (including) all those millions of Democrats and independents who I know are looking for a cause around which to rally and which I believe we can give them. Mr. President, before you arrive tonight, these wonderful people, here, when we came in, gave Nancy and myself a welcome. That, plus this, plus your kindness and generosity in honoring us by bringing us down here will give us a memory that will live in our hearts forever.

Watching on television these last few nights Ive seen also the warmth with which you greeted Nancy and you also filled my heart with joy when you did that. May I say some words. There are cynics who say that a party platform is something that no one bothers to read and is doesnt very often amount to much. Whether it is different this time than is has ever been before, I believe the Republican party has a platform that is a banner of bold, unmistakable colors with no pale pastel shades. We have just heard a call to arms, based on that platform.

And a call to us to really be successful in communicating and reveal to the American people the difference between this platform and the platform of the opposing party which is nothing but a revamp and a reissue and a rerunning of a late, late show of the thing that we have been hearing from them for the last 40 years.

If I could just take a moment, I had an assignment the other day. Someone asked me to write a letter for a time capsule that is going to opened in Los Angeles a hundred years from now, on our Tricentennial.

It sounded like an easy assignment. They suggested I write about the problems and issues of the day. And I set out to do so, riding down the coast in an automobile, looking at the blue Pacific out on one side and the Santa Ynez Mountains on the other, and I couldnt help but wonder if it was going to be that beautiful a hundred years from now as it was on that summer day.

And then as I tried to write-let your own minds turn to that task. Youre going to write for people a hundred years from now who know all about us, we know nothing about them. We dont know what kind of world theyll be living in. And suddenly I thought to myself, If I write of the problems, theyll be the domestic problems of which the President spoke here tonight; the challenges confronting us, the erosion of freedom taken place under Democratic rule in this country, the invasion of private rights, the controls and restrictions on the vitality of the great free economy that we enjoy. These are the challenges that we must meet and then again there is that challenge of which he spoke that we live in a world in which the great powers have aimed and poised at each other horrible missiles of destruction, nuclear weapons that can in a matter of minutes arrive at each others country and destroy virtually the civilized world we live in.

And suddenly it dawned on me; those who would read this letter a hundred years from now will know whether those missiles were fired. They will know whether we met our challenge.

Whether they will have the freedom that we have known up until now will depend on what we do here. Will they look back with appreciation and say, Thank God for those people in 1976 who headed off that loss of freedom? Who kept us now a hundred years later free? Who kept our world from nuclear destruction?

And if we fail they probably wont get to read the letter at all because it spoke of individual freedom and they wont be allowed to talk of that or read of it.

This is our challenge and this is why were here in this hall tonight. Better than weve ever done before, weve got to quit talking to each other and about each other and go out and communicate to the world that we may be fewer in numbers than weve ever been but we carry the message theyre waiting for. We must go forth from here united, determined and what a great general said a few years ago is true: There is no substitute for victory. Mr. President.

#
#announcment president
#

Good evening. I am here tonight to announce my intention to seek the Republican nomination for President of the United States.

I'm sure that each of us has seen our country from a number of viewpoints depending on where weve lived and what we've done. For me it has been as a boy growing up in several small towns in Illinois. As a young man in Iowa trying to get a start in the years of the great depression and later in California for most of my adult life.

I've seen America from the stadium press box as a sportscaster, as an actor, officer of my labor union, soldier, officeholder and as both Democrat and Republican. Ive lived in an America where those who often had too little to eat outnumbered those who had enough. There have been four wars in my lifetime and Ive seen our country face financial ruin in depression. I have also seen the great strength of this nation as it pulled itself up from that ruin to become the dominant force in the world.

To me our country is a living, breathing presence, unimpressed by what others say is impossible, proud of its own success, generous, yes and nae, sometimes wrong, never mean and always impatient to provide a better life for its people in a framework of a basic fairness and freedom.

Someone once said that the difference between an American and any other kind of person is that an American lives in anticipation of the future because he knows it will be a great place. Other people fear the future as just a repetition of past failures. Theres a lot of truth in that. If there is one thing we are sure of it is that history need not be relived; that nothing is impossible, and that man is capable of improving his circumstances beyond what we are told is fact.

There are those in our land today, however, who would have us believe that the United States, like other great civilizations of the past, has reached the zenith of its power; that we are weak and fearful, reduced to bickering with each other and no longer possessed of the will to cope with our problems.

Much of this talk has come from leaders who claim that our problems are too difficult to handle. We are supposed to meekly accept their failures as the most which humanly can be done. They tell us we must learn to live with less, and teach our children that their lives will be less full and prosperous than ours have been; that the America of the coming years will be a place where because of our past excesses it will be impossible to dream and make those dreams come true.

I dont believe that. And, I dont believe you do either. That is why I am seeking the presidency. I cannot and will not stand by and see this great country destroy itself. Our leaders attempt to blame their failures on circumstances beyond their control, on false estimates by unknown, unidentifiable experts who rewrite modern history in an attempt to convince us our high standard of living, the result of thrift and hard work, is somehow selfish extravagance which we must renounce as we join in sharing scarcity. I dont agree that our nation must resign itself to inevitable decline, yielding its proud position to other hands. I am totally unwilling to see this country fail in its obligation to itself and to the other free peoples of the world.

The crisis we face is not the result of any failure of the American spirit; it is a failure of our leaders to establish rational goals and give our people something to order their lives by. If I am elected, I shall regard my election as proof that the people of the United States have decided to set a new agenda and have recognized that the human spirit thrives best when goals are set and progress can be measured in their achievement.

During the next year I shall discuss in detail a wide variety of problems which a new administration must address. Tonight I shall mention only a few.

No problem that we face today can compare with the need to restore the health of the American economy and the strength of the American dollar. Double-digit inflation has robbed you and your family of the ability to plan. It has destroyed the confidence to buy and it threatens the very structure of family life itself as more and more wives are forced to work in order to help meet the ever-increasing cost of living. At the same time, the lack of year growth in the economy has introduced the justifiable fear in the minds of working men and women who are already over extended that soon there will be fewer jobs and no money to pay for even the necessities of life. And tragically as the cost of living keeps going up, the standard of living which has been our great pride keeps going down.

The people have not created this disaster in our economy; the federal government has. It has overspent, overestimated, and over regulated. It has failed to deliver services within the revenues it should be allowed to raise from taxes. In the thirty-four years since the end of World War II, it has spent 448 billion dollars more than it has collection in taxes 448 billion dollars of printing press money, which has made every dollar you earn worth less and less. At the same time, the federal government has cynically told us that high taxes on business will in some way solve the problem and allow the average taxpayer to pay less. Well, business is not a taxpayer it is a tax collector. Business has to pass its tax burden on to the customer as part of the cost of doing business. You and I pay the taxes imposed on business every time we go to the store. Only people pay taxes and it is political demagoguery or economic illiteracy to try and tell us otherwise.

The key to restoring the health of the economy lies in cutting taxes. At the same time, we need to get the waste out of federal spending. This does not mean sacrificing essential services, nor do we need to destroy the system of benefits which flow to the poor, the elderly, the sick and the handicapped. We have long since committed ourselves, as a people, to help those among us who cannot take care of themselves. But the federal government has proven to be the costliest and most inefficient provider of such help we could possibly have.

We must put an end to the arrogance of a federal establishment which accepts no blame for our condition, cannot be relied upon to give us a fair estimate of our situation and utterly refuses to live within its means. I will not accept the supposed wisdom which has it that the federal bureaucracy has become so powerful that it can no longer be changed or controlled by any administration. As President I would use every power at my command to make the federal establishment respond to the will and the collective wishes of the people.

We must force the entire federal bureaucracy to live in the real world of reduced spending, streamlined functions and accountability to the people it serves. We must review the functions of the federal government to determine which of those are the proper province of levels of government closer to the people.

The 10th article of the Bill of Rights is explicit in pointing out that the federal government should do only those things specifically called for in the Constitution. All others shall remain with the states or the people. We havent been observing that 10th article of late. The federal government has taken on functions it was never intended to perform and which it does not perform well. There should be a planned, orderly transfer of such functions to states and communities and a transfer with them of the sources of taxation to pay for them.

The savings in administrative would be considerable and certainly there would be increased efficiency and less bureaucracy.

By reducing federal tax rates where they discourage individual initiative especially personal income tax rates we can restore incentives, invite greater economic growth and at the same time help give us better government instead of bigger government. Proposals such as the Kemp-Roth bill would bring about this kind of realistic reductions in tax rates.

In short, a punitive tax system must be replaced by one that restores incentive for the worker and for industry; a system that rewards initiative and effort and encourages thrift.

All these things are possible; none of them will be easy. But the choice is clear. We can go on letting the country slip over the brink to financial ruin with the disaster that it means for the individual or we can find the will to work together to restore confidence in ourselves and to regain the confidence of the world. I have lived through one depression. I carry with me the memory of a Christmas Eve when my brother and I and our parents exchanged modest gifts there was no lighted tree as there had been on Christmases past. I remember watching my father open what he thought was a greeting from his employer. We all watched and yes, we were hoping for a bonus check. It was notice that he no longer had a job. And in those days the government ran radio announcements telling workers not to leave home looking for jobs there were no jobs. Ill carry with me always the memory of my father sitting there holding that envelope, unable to look at us. I cannot and will not stand by while inflation and joblessness destroy the dignity of our people.

Another serious problem which must be discussed tonight is our energy situation. Our country was built on cheap energy. Today, energy is not cheap and we face the prospect that some forms of energy may soon not be available at all.

Last summer you probably spent hours sitting in gasoline lines. This winter, some will be without heat and everyone will be paying much more simply to keep home and family warm. If you ever had any doubt of the governments inability to provide for the needs of the people, just look at the utter fiasco we now call the energy crisis. Not one straight answer nor any realistic hope of relief has come from the present administration in almost three years of federal treatment of the problem. As gas lines grew, the administration again panicked and now has proposed to put the country on a wartime footing; but for this war there is no victory in sight. And, as always, when the federal bureaucracy fails, all it can suggest is more of the same. This time its another bureau to untangle the mess made by the ones we already have.

But, this just wont work. Solving the energy crisis will not be easy, but it can be done. First we must decide that less is not enough. Next we must remove government obstacles to energy production. And, we must make use of those technological advantages we still possess.

It is no program simply to say use less energy. Of course waste must be eliminated and efficiency promoted, but not an energy policy. At best it means we will run out of energy a little more slowly. But a day will come when the lights will dim and the wheels of industry will turn more slowly and finally stop. As President I will not endorse any course which has this as its principle objective.

We need more energy and that means diversifying our sources of supply away from the OPEC countries. Yes, it means more efficient automobiles. But it also means more exploration and development of oil and natural gas here in our own country. The only way to free ourselves from the monopoly pricing power of OPEC is to be less dependent on outside sources of fuel.

The answer obvious to anyone except those in the administration, it seems, is more domestic production of oil and gas. We must also have wider use of nuclear power within strict safety rules, of course. There must be more spending by the energy industries on research and development of substitutes for fossil fuels.

In years to come solar energy may provide much of the answer but for the next two or three decades we must do such things as master the chemistry of coal. Putting the market system to work for these objectives is an essential first step for their achievement. Additional multi-billion dollar federal bureaus and programs are not the answer.

In recent weeks there has been much talk about excess oil company profits. I dont believe weve been given all the information we need to make a judgement about this. We should have that information. Government exists to protect us from each other. It is not governments function to allocate fuel or impose unnecessary restrictions on the marketplace. It is governments function to determine whether we are being unfairly exploited and if so to take immediate and appropriate action. As President I would do exactly that.

On the foreign front, the decade of the 1980s will place severe pressures upon the United States and its allies. We can expect to be tested in ways calculated to try our patience, to confound our resolve and to erode our belief in ourselves. During a time when the Soviet Union may enjoy nuclear superiority over this country, we must never waiver in our commitment to our allies nor accept any negotiation which is not clearly in the national interest. We must judge carefully. Though we should leave no initiative untried in our pursuit of peace, we must be clear voiced in our resolve to resist any unpeaceful act wherever it may occur. Negotiations with the Soviet Union must never become appeasement.

For the most of the last forty years, we have been preoccupied with the global struggle the competition with the Soviet Union and with our responsibilities to our allies. But too often in recent times we have just drifted along with events, responding as if we thought of ourselves as a nation in decline. To our allies we seem to appear to be a nation unable to make decisions in its own interests, let alone in the common interest. Since the Second World War we have spent large amounts of money and much of our time protecting and defending freedom all over the world. We must continue this, for if we do not accept the responsibilities of leadership, who will? And if no one will, how will we survive?

The 1970s have taught us the foolhardiness of not having a long-range diplomatic strategy of our own. The world has become a place where, in order to survive, our country needs more than just allies it needs real friends. Yet, in recent times we often seem not to have recognized who our friends are. This must change. It is now time to take stock of our own house and to resupply its strength.

Part of that process involves taking stock of our relationship with Puerto Rico. I favor statehood for Puerto Rico and if the people of Puerto Rico vote for statehood in their coming referendum I would, as President, initiate the enabling legislation to make this a reality.

We live on a continent whose three countries possess the assets to make it the strongest, most prosperous and self-sufficient area on earth. Within the borders of this North American continent are the food, resources, technology and undeveloped territory which, properly managed, could dramatically improve the quality of life of all its inhabitants.

It is no accident that this unmatched potential for progress and prosperity exists in three countries with such long-standing heritages of free government. A developing closeness among Canada, Mexico and the United States a North American accord would permit achievement of that potential in each country beyond that which I believe any of them strong as they are could accomplish in the absence of such cooperation. In fact, the key to our own future security may lie in both Mexico and Canada becoming much stronger countries than they are today.

No one can say at this point what form future cooperation among our three countries will take. But if I am elected President, I would be willing to invite each of our neighbors to send a special representative to our government to sit in on high level planning sessions with us, as partners, mutually concerned about the future of our Continent. First, I would immediately seek the views and ideas of Canadian and Mexican leaders on this issue, and work tirelessly with them to develop closer ties among our peoples. It is time we stopped thinking of our nearest neighbors as foreigners.

By developing methods of working closely together, we will lay the foundations for future cooperation on a broader and more significant scale. We will also put to rest any doubts of those cynical enough to believe that the United States would seek to dominate any relationship among our three countries, or foolish enough to think that the governments and peoples of Canada and Mexico would ever permit such domination to occur. I, for one, am confident that we can show the world by example that the nations of North America are ready, within the context of an unswerving commitment to freedom, to seek new forms of accommodation to meet a changing world. A developing closeness between the United States, Canada and Mexico would serve notice on friend and foe alike that we were prepared for a long haul, looking outward again and confident our of future; that together we are going to create jobs, to generate new fortunes of wealth for many and provide a legacy for the children of each of our countries.

Two hundred years ago we taught the world that a new form of government, created out of the genius of man to cope with his circumstances, could succeed in bringing a measure of quality to human life previously thought impossible.

Now let us work toward the goal of using the assets of this continent, its resources, technology and foodstuffs in the most efficient ways possible for the common good of all its people. It may take the next 100 years but we can dare to dream that at some future date a map of the world might show the North American continent as one in which the peoples and commerce of its three strong countries flow more freely across their present borders than they do today.

In recent months leaders in our government have told us that, we, the people, have lost confidence in ourselves; that we must regain the spirit and our will to achieve our national goals. Well, it is true there is a lack of confidence, an unease with things the way they are. But the confidence we have lost is confidence in our governments policies. Our unease can almost be called bewilderment at how our defense strength has deteriorated. The great productivity of our industry is now surpassed by virtually all the major nations who compete with us for world markets. And, our currency is no longer the stable measure of value it once was.

But there remains the greatness of our people, our capacity for dreaming up fantastic deeds and bringing them off to the surprise of an unbelieving world. When Washingtons men were freezing at Valley Forge, Tom Paine told his fellow Americans: We have it in our power to begin the world over again. We still have that power.

Todays living Americans have in our lifetime fought harder, paid a higher price for freedom and done more to advance the dignity of man than any people who ever lived on this earth. The citizens of this great nation want leadershipyesbut not a man on a white horse demanding obedience to his commands. They want someone who believes they can begin the world over again. A leader who will unleash their great strength and remove the roadblocks government has put in their way. I want to do that more than anything Ive ever wanted. And its something that I believe with Gods help I can do

I believe this nation hungers for a spiritual revival; hungers to once again see honor placed above political expediency; to see government once again the protector of our liberties, not the distributor of gifts and privilege. Government should uphold and not undermine those institutions which are custodians of the very values upon which civilization is foundedreligion, education and, above all, family. Government cannot be clergyman, teacher and parent. It is our servant, beholden to us.

We who are privileged to be Americans have had a rendezvous with destiny since the moment in 1630 when John Winthrop, standing on the deck of the tiny Arbella off the coast of Massachusetts, told the little band of pilgrims, We shall be as a city upon a hill. The eyes of all people are upon us so that if we shall deal falsely with our God in this work we have undertaken and so cause Him to withdraw His present help from us, we shall be made a story and a byword throughout the world.

A troubled and afflicted mankind looks to us, pleading for us to keep our rendezvous with destiny; that we will uphold the principles of self-reliance, self-discipline, morality, andabove allresponsible liberty for every individual that we will become that shining city on a hill.

I believe that you and I together can keep this rendezvous with destiny.

Thank you and good night.

#
#1980 PRESIDENTIAL FORUM
#

Good evening, ladies and gentlemen.  We are very pleased tonight to have two Candidates for the Republican nomination for the Presidency of the United States:  former Ambassador George Bush of Texas, former Governor Ronald Reagan of California.

  Gentlemen, before we begin, in response to the League of Women Voters’ announcement today that it will sponsor the Presidential debates after the conventions, as it did four years ago in 1976, let me ask if nominated by your party, would you agree to participate?

MR.BUSH:  I’d love to debate in the Rose Garden.  I think that would be extraordinarily—yes, sir, I would.

MR. SMITH:  Thank you, Ambassador.

MR. REAGAN:  I can’t wait.

MR. SMITH:  Thank you very much, gentlemen.

This evening’s forum will last just 60 minutes.  As you both have agreed, there will be no specific time limits to what you have to say.  You will have an open discussion on the issues.  You can address comments and questions to one another.  I will reserve the chairman’s privilege of occasionally asking a question if I want to change the subject and think it’s wise to do so.  And towards the end of the forum, we will accept questions from the audience; and after that, there will be brief closing statements by you.

The first question:  Ambassador Bush, everyone, including your opponent, has congratulated you on your stunning victory in Pennsylvania yesterday.  In the course of the program, Face the Nation, on Sunday, you said you hoped to win because you had adopted the strategy of hammering away at the differences between you and Mr. Reagan.  And one difference you mentioned was, you said, in your words, was Mr. Reagan was overpromising the American people.

Could you explain that, and, if the spirit moves you, could you respond?

MR. BUSH:  First, it was Meet the Press.  I don’t want to put in a plug for the wrong outfit; and, secondly, I also made the point that what we must do is defeat Jimmy Carter.  I mean I got that into focus, and that I wanted to get these differences out with the Governor so the voters could make a good determination.  I hope that’s what’s happened in Pennsylvania.

 A big difference, for example, that the Governor and I have regards this tax cut.  He feels—I don’t want to put words in his mouth, and he is here to defend or explain his position—that you can cut taxes by 70 billion the first year.  The WALL STREET JOURNAL attributed the figure to the tax cut idea to 90 billion the first year, cut inheritance and gift taxes—we computed that at $5.4 billion—and still balance the budget and still increase defense spending.

 President Kennedy suggested this cut.  It was implemented by Johnson.  The cut was 11.4 billion.  It resulted in a $4.4 billion revenue loss.   Inflation then was 1.8 percent.  Today it is 18.  Investor confidence was out there; today there is none.

 So, in my judgment, that economic program would exacerbate the deficit.  It would result in less stimulation of the economy because of the conditions.  And I believe that before we can have massive across-the-board tax cuts, we’ve got to get the budget in balance.

So, I am proposing a $20 billion, as opposed to 70 or 90, supply aide tax cut to stimulate savings for home to stimulate business. 

That is a major difference.  There are plenty of others, but I do want to give the Governor a chance to respond.

MR. SMITH:  Governor?

MR. REAGAN:  That is, indeed, a major difference; and I still believe firmly, and I think there are some differences of opinion about figures.  Four times in this century we have had across-the-board tax cuts, all of which have resulted in such an increase in prosperity that the government even in the first year got increased revenues, not less.  In the Kennedy year, the total revenues for government, and, of course, government was much smaller then, about $109 billion instead of the 600 that will be coming up in ’81, but according to the figures then, but the federal government got some $5 billion in additional revenue and got about $1.1 billion additional revenue in the income tax.

But let me point something out.  George mentioned the differences here.  Under Jimmy Carter, the tax burden, as a percentage of the gross national product, has reached the highest level in the history of our nation.  It is also the highest percentage of personal income that it has ever been in our history.  Now, under the President’s revised ’81 budget, the total Federal taxes are projected as $628 billion.  Of that, 283.1 will be individual income tax.  That’s 115 percent increase in that tax since he took office.

Now, over the next 10 years, if things aren’t changed, it is estimated that the total tax increase on the people of America will be one-and–a-half trillion dollars.

Now, rather than the Kemp-Roth Bill, which I support, the idea of a 10-percent cut across the board, the income tax, administered over a three-year period to a total of 30 percent, I believe will stimulate the economy, will create jobs, but it will not reduce federal incomes.  It will only reduce the increase in taxes, because we are going to be faced with an increase in taxes that is far beyond our comprehension right now.  And if we figured that cut as a percentage of $628 billion, you would be reducing the first year less than five percent, perhaps about four percent, in the total tax revenues that the government is going to be getting.  But I believe at the same time history has proven in all those other tax cuts, I believe that will stimulate the economy, more people will be working and it will be contrary to the Carter policy now of fighting inflation by adding millions to the unemployment roles.

And so I support and stand by the idea of incentive taxes geared to the free enterprise system that will provide incentive to increase productivity so we can compete in the international market which we can’t do on even terms today.

MR. BUSH:  I agree with that, but the difference we have is that it is my understanding the Kennedy tax cut implemented by Lyndon Johnson, resulted in a $4.4 billion deficit; and inflation then was 1.8, not 18 percent.  Investor confidence was high, not low; and it is my perception that that tax cut applied today in the same percentage, the same numbers, would result in an inflation rate of about 30 to 32 percent.  And so I would—I couldn’t agree more about the percent of our gross national product taken by taxes, but I believe the first thing we must do is get in balance.  Incidentally, not the way Jimmy Carter proposes, by higher and higher taxes.  Get in balance by the reduction of expenditures, get in balance by a $20 billion supply side tax cut and then begin to reduce rates.

But if we risk with investor confidence where it is, a deficit that’s going to be up already, I think, 37 billion, $30 billion on top of that, I’m afraid we can’t break inflation, and we’ve got to do that and do it fast.

MR. REAGAN:  Well, George, we’ve got to do that.  And, of course, it goes without saying, and I certainly believe in reducing the cost of government far more than the phony decrease that Mr. Carter has proposed.  But when you suggested, as you have, about a $20 billion dollar tax cut, that is less than the federal government is going to get in a single year, undeserved, from people that just received cost-of-living pay raises and were pushed up into higher tax brackets.  That amounts to more than $20 billion.

MR. BUSH:  But if we get that in balance and then do what I say, start reducing the rates, that is the key thing.  Your plan in my judgment and the judgment of many economists would risk exacerbating that deficit.  And today our creditors abroad, our economy is linked to foreign economies, and they take a look at us and see us living at deficit after deficit.  You cite the Kennedy tax cut.  There wasn’t any surplus then.  There was a deficit resulted from that scheme.  Arthur Laffer, the economist that proposed it, he himself says, “I don’t know whether it would work.”

I don’t believe we can take that kind of risk, Governor, and I would not propose it.

MR. REAGAN:  George, how much more risk is there in just going along with what we’ve been doing?

MR. BUSH:  That’s not what I propose.  I propose something very different than just going along.

MR. REAGAN:  Let me just say one other thing:  I have heard for a great many years that we can’t possibly reduce taxes..  This is Washington’s cry.

MR. BUSH:  I agree.

MR. REAGAN:  We can’t reduce taxes until we reduce government spending.  And I have to point out that government does not tax to get the money it needs;  government always needs the money it gets.  Now, your son can be extravagant with his allowance, and you can lecture him day after day about saving money and not being extravagant or you can solve the problem by cutting his allowance.

MR. BUSH:  But the program I’m putting forward cuts the allowance, cuts on the spending side.  It doesn’t risk this “promise everybody everything,” because you cut taxes $210 billion, you favor increasing defense and you favor cutting out inheritance and gift taxes;  and I believe that you’re going to end up with a much bigger deficit.  And that’s where you and I differ.

Listen, you talk to me about gross national product and percent of taxes.  My whole program is based on getting tax relief.  But I am not going to do it in a way, popular though it may be, if it’s going to, in my view, make that deficit—

MR. REAGAN:  There is one last point I want to make.  There is one last point we haven’t touched on.  We are talking as if those dollars that are saved in taxes are not going to have any effect, no multiplier effect, when they are in the people’s pockets and they’re used out there in society.  And it has been proven that there is a far greater multiplier effect and creation of prosperity in money spent by the people and invested by the people then there is when it is spend by government; and, therefore, we’ve got to recognize that that money isn’t going to be buried in a tin can in the backyard.  It’s going to be used to buy things.  And when we buy things, productivity is going increase; people are going to put it in the savings account; then we’re going to have the capital to invest in new plant and equipment and research and development.  We have the highest percentage today of outmoded industrial plant and equipment of any of the industrial nations in the world.  We can’t compete evenly with the, because we don’t have the capital investment to put into business anymore.

MR. BUSH:  That’s why my cut—

MR. SMITH:  You’re getting close to—

MR. BUSH:  --is a supply side tax cut.  That’s what will stimulate production.  That’s the cut I want.

MR. SMITH:  You’re getting close to something you agree on.  I want to try and keep you from agreeing.

Governor Reagan, there’s a question I have to ask you, the front runner always gets shot at more than anybody else;  he is the point man, and there is a volley I must ask you about and you should have a chance to answer.

Many observers have said that many of the facts that you use in your arguments are wrong.  You’ve spoken of the Kennedy 30 percent tax cut, when it was really 18 percent.

MR. REAGAN:  That was the first year.  It was a two-year tax cut, Howard, and it was 27 percent.  And I think that’s close enough to round out to 30.

 MR. SMITH:  You have spoken of a Government Accounting Office study showing either 11 billion or 50 billion dollars waste in government and the GAO says it doesn’t have such a survey.

MR. REAGAN:  No, it turned out it was the Justice Department gave that figure.

MR. SMITH:  And you said that it costs the government $3 to provide $1 worth of benefits, and HEW says it costs .12 cents for a dollar of benefits.

MR. REAGAN:  And I wouldn’t believe HEW if they were here in the room saying it.

MR. SMITH:  There were several other facts like that cited and you dispute those or—

MR. REAGAN:  Well, I’d like to.  Something just happened tonight.  The UPI and a pretty good writer, Don Lambreaux, just has come out with a story that has to do with one set of figures I used about how many employees the Carter Administration had added back.  And it seems that one of the networks, which shall be nameless, went on the air and they had gone to a fellow in government to ask him and he said, why, there were only 6,000 added in all these three years under the Carter administration.  But. Mr. Lambreaux goes on to say that, while my figures might not have been fully accurate at this time, I appear to be closer to the mark.

He says that in the last three years the total number of government workers has grown by at least 63,282 not 6,000.  I had said 131,000.  But, then, he went on to point out that there are about 145,000 persons officially work for the Department of HEW;  however, HEW is also paying the salaries of 1 million additional workers who labor for the HEW in state and local governments, universities, consulting firms and other organizations.  Moreover, federal revenue pays the salaries of 77,000 state workers in the U.S. employment and unemployment offices around the country.  All of these workers, who collectively add millions to the rolls are excluded from the government’s employee records.   How much of their numbers increased over the last three years no one knows because no official count has even been taken.  When this is added to the nearly 5 million civilian and military employees on the government’s official rolls, we see that as many as 14 million people are working for the government.  And this means that at least one U.S. worker one of eight owes his job to Washington.  And he concludes saying, “Thus, Reagan’s 131,000 increase in perfectly possible and may, in fact, actually understate the real rise in federal employment.”

MR. SMITH:  All right, sir.  You have covered that point.  Now, how about the other points?  Do you thing that occasionally you do make a misstep?

MR. REAGAN:  Certainly, anyone that’s standing up without notes and ad-libbing answers to questions is going to slip up:  one, on some oil figures, comparing Alaska and Saudi Arabia.  The figures weren’t wrong, but if all the things that I’ve read and I’ve studied and researched on that, I attributed them to the wrong report and gave U.S. Geological Survey the responsibility for having used those figures.  And, so, again, they checked simply with U.S. Geological Survey who said “those figures weren’t in our report.”   But I found that that’s all I had done in that particular one.

What were some of those others you mentioned there, because I have been waiting for an opportunity to do this.  I have confidence in the facts and figures that I’ve used.

MR. SMITH:  I don’t want to insist on them.  You said it cost $3 to deliver $1 in benefits.

MR. REAGAN:  Oh, well, I’ll tell you.  This one did appear in an account by an economist, and I will admit, that not having any chance to check it with the economist, I took the figure that was used for redistribution of income outside of Social Security to people below the poverty level, and I took the figure of those below the poverty level and divided it into the total figure, and it came out that if the people below the poverty level were getting all the of the money in that budget, a family of four would be receiving $27,000 a year, which is about four times as much as they are receiving.  And I figured that made three to one over it.

MR. BUSH:  Let me—

MR. SMITH:  Do you want to talk about that?

 MR. BUSH:  In my view, what we ought to be doing something about the employee thing.  You know, Jimmy Carter fought the Leach Amendment that would have set a ceiling on federal employment through attrition.  Nobody would have been thrown out of a job; but as people left, some would not be replaced.  He fought against that.  He campaigned on less people employed.

I drove by the EOB the other day and across from it is a building I am told is staffed, maybe some on temporary assignment, by people really working for the White House.  White House staff is grown.  They don’t feel any of this recession.  They don’t feel any of these layoffs that the steel workers feel or felt or some of the people around here are beginning to feel.  And so that’s what I’d do on that one.

On energy, I don’t believe, frankly, that there’s enough oil in Alaska within the reasonable future to replace the 9 million barrels a day we get from overseas.  I believe a decline curve has already set in on Alaskan oil.  Some companies have already started pulling out of Alaska.   And so my energy program is not just decontrol and figure we can get it all in Alaska, but it’s use alternate sources of energy.  Go with decontrol, of course, but use alternate sources of energy as well.

MR. SMITH:  Let me ask you both about something that is just developing now and that is that famous recession we have been waiting for, but which is now at last beginning to happen.  It may be there when either of you may become President.  What is your tendency:  to let a recession go its length in the hope that it will reduce inflation, or try to halt recession by things like government expenditures or tax cuts that may stimulate inflation?

Governor Reagan?

MR. REAGAN:  Well, I don’t believe the alternative to inflation is recession.  I think that’s old-fashioned economics.  I don’t think that you have to trade unemployment—and, incidentally, President Carter as a candidate said that he would never fight inflation by using unemployment.  President Carter in his present economic message has said that as a part of his fight against inflation, unemployment is going to be allowed to go up one to one-and-a-half or two percentage points.

Now, this is self-destructive, because for every single percentage point that you add to the unemployment rolls, you add 25 to 29 billion dollars to the federal deficit, both in the loss of revenue from those no longer working and in the benefits that go out to them.

No I would do the things that I have talked about in regard to cutting of government, and I can point to some experience in that same situation.  When I became Governor of California, it was just like the federal government, bankrupt, and with a deficit, and a mounting deficit.  And I know that some of these things work.  I would even go back to an example that happened since I was Governor in California, Prop 13.  Everyone in the country heard the horrifying tales of what was going to happen if they cut the property tax as much as Proposition 13 said they were going to.  Well, it has been in effect about 18 months now.  And the result is there are 100,000 fewer public workers.  But the private sector in these 18 months has created 532,000 new jobs, and the State of California would up with a $3 billion surplus.

MR. SMITH:  Ambassador Bush?

MR. BUSH:  I don’t believe there is an economics total soft landing.  I don’t believe it.  It is not in my concept of economics.  I believe you are going to see some increase in unemployment, but I believe that way you fight that is to stimulate capital formation, risk-taking and production.  And the way you do that is through this kind of approach to cutting taxes I talked about, as well as fighting the inflationary side by getting government spending under control.  And I believe it would work.  There are programs that will help for retraining.  I like the idea of training people in the private sector for jobs that exist through tax credits rather than train them up in a SETA program that gets some kid’s hopes up.  He really wants to work, gets his hopes up, and then there is no government job for him, or any job for him.  Train them for jobs that don’t exist.

So I’m afraid you’re going to see unemployment creep up.  I would fight that by production, supply side tax cuts, stimulating the private sector, and I believe that would work if you hold government under control.  But you can’t go and risk making the deficit bigger at the same time, otherwise you still have that inflationary problem.  My problem with Jimmy Carter, when he came in he addressed himself to one thing:  stimulation of the employment sector and lowering unemployment.  And he did that to some degree for awhile, but inflation went right off the charts because of these reckless deficits.

MR. REAGAN:  Well, but he did other things to create the reckless deficits.  He said that he was going to streamline government, and he streamlined it.  He created the energy industry that’s got a budget as big as the total profits of the major oil companies.  He has now created the cabinet level, National Department of Education, with more millions of dollars.  He’s got the biggest staff, as you pointed out, in the White House, I think, of any President that we know of.  I think that he was going to trim things has—I laughed when he called Teddy Kennedy the biggest spender in the Senate.  Well, he’s the biggest spender that has ever been in the White House.  I feel when you said, again, stimulate, provide incentive for increased productivity.  The American worker today is saving the lowest percentage of his earnings at any time in the last 30 odd years.  And a Japanese worker can save five times the percentage of his earnings than an American can;  a West German work, three times.

It’s that money that is not going into savings accounts, not going to insurance premiums, that is not there as capital to invest in private sector.  And the only capital investment they’ve been able to make has been mandated on them by this government to meet certain federal requirements, either in safety or environment or whatever.  It’s added to production costs.  It’s reduced productivity, and I want to see an increase in productivity, too.  And all I can say is I think the system you are talking about we’ve been trying for a lot of years, really, off and on.  And I think it is time for something new and I think what is new is let’s believe in the people once again, that they can spend their money smarter than the government can.

MR. SMITH:  Let me ask you a question that is almost philosophical.

Ladies and gentlemen, please suppress your enthusiasm until we’re finished, because people will think someone is taking sides and we don’t want them to think you are.

Mr. Reagan and Ambassador Bush, you blame the government for many of our ills, but in many ways is not government absolutely essential and hasn’t it many achievements to its credit?  The most productive industry we have is agriculture, and its productivity is due, mainly, to government activity and the research stations.  The World War II, the government created an aluminum industry, when private industry wouldn’t touch it, and sold it then to private industry.  And our most spectacular achievement lately, the putting a man on the moon, was a government project, a government plan, which private enterprise carried out.

Aren’t you underrating the effectiveness of government?

MR. BUSH:  No.  I don’t think government adds to production.  You can cite an example of the aluminum industry, now much better done in the private sector.  And when you have a war-time economy, of course you’re going to have government intervention in certain things; stimulation of ship building, for example.  But tell you what is happening; government has moved in on the private sector with so much regulation.

I built a business right here in Texas.  Started it from scratch.  And when we started out there into the Gulf to drill a well, we needed I think it was two permits.  Today I am told it is 12 permits.  Every time you turn around, there is too much regulation.  Yes, government does some things, and they can help people, and they do help people.  And I’m not an anti-government people, person.  They provide for the defense, and there are certain functions that government has that are compassionate, and I think good.

And I have a difference with the Governor as to whether you turn everything back to the states of not:  welfare, for example.  I think there is room for a partnership there.  But what government does is not productive; and we ought to be cutting it back, because it isn’t adding to this productivity that I think is essential if we’re going to beat inflation and give the bypass citizen, the person in the Fifth Ward of Houston, that has been bypassed, give then an opportunity to have a running start as they get into the work force.

MR. SMITH:  Mr. Reagan.

MR. REAGAN:  Yes, Howard, I brought some figures along here because I thought they might come in handy someplace, and here it is.

If Americans, since 1950, in the last 30 years, had been able to save and invest, if our economy had only grown one and a half percent more a year, our incomes would be 50 percent higher; jobs would be plentiful; we’d have a balance budget; lower payroll taxes, instead of higher; stable prices; a solvent Social Security program; and our industrial economy would be three times as great as that of the Soviet Union; and we would have unquestioned military superiority.

Now, you mentioned—I agree, too, there are legitimate functions government must perform.  And the basic three that are outlined in the very basis of our government and our constitution is that the federal government exists to protect us from outside aggression; our national security to protect us from disorder within; and to guaranty the stability of our money.  And in all three of those at the moment we could say this administration has failed.  They have not protected our national security.  They have let it decline to where we are in the most dangerous point we’ve been in that I can recall.  They have—we know about disorder in the streets and crime and so forth.  And the third one, also, the stability of our money, the dollar is worth less in relation to other currency than it’s ever been in our history.

MR. SMITH:  Gentlemen, you both stated your viewpoints.  Now, to move things on to another subject.  There was supposed to be a third man here tonight, Congressman John Anderson of Illinois.  We received word he would not take part, and it is expected that tomorrow or perhaps the next day he will announce that he is forming a third party and he will be the candidate.

What do you think the effect of that will be on the election that you hope to take part in?

Ambassador Bush.

MR. BUSH:  Well, I don’t really believe after the initial flurry that it’s going to make that much difference.  I believe that they’ll be more apt to pull from Jimmy Carter because his backing and those shoving him forward and helping him on this are those that I think would be for Teddy Kennedy if they thought he was going to be in there and have a shot; and, so, I don’t think it will be third party.  I think he will run as an independent, and I think he’ll have had the same success that others have had that have run as independents.

We are a two-party system.  Part of our stability comes from the two-party system.  I asked him in the debate in Illinois whether he was willing to support the nominee of the party.  He made very clear then that he was not prepared so to state.  And I think you are probably right, that he will do this.  But I don’t believe it’s going to amount to much.  After the initial blush and a couple of good trips around the country, I don’t see—he’s caught.  He’s caught because he doesn’t have really the true credentials of a Kennedy, and yet he seems to want to move away from the credentials that got him elected to the House.  And that dichotomy, that contradiction, is going to hurt him some; but let him do what he wants.  I mean, that’s the way I look at it.

MR. SMITH:  Do what he wants.

Governor Reagan, the polls the other day said he could get 28 percent of the votes.  I don’t know if the poll is accurate or not, but if he did, he could throw the election you hope to be in into the House of Representatives where the Democrats have a majority.  Wouldn’t that be a threat to you?

MR. REAGAN:  That would be a disaster.  I agree with George, though.  I think whatever he is going to get, he is probably going to take away from the Carter side more than from our side.  And I know that I speak for George when I say we sure do miss him tonight.  Don’t we?

MR. SMITH:  Gentlemen, let’s turn to foreign affairs.

Both of you have been unsatisfied with how the President has been handling the Iranian crises lately, and now he is apparently having some thoughts of using force which I think you’ve indicated in a general way you approve of.  Let me run some forcible options past you and see whether you approve or disapprove.

The most often quoted one is mining the oil ports of Persia, blockading the oil ports of Persia.  Is there not a danger if that were adopted that the Russians would send mine sweepers in to sweep the mines or run the blockade and we would have to either shoot or shut up?

Do you find that, Governor Reagan, a danger?

MR. REAGAN:  Well, it’s difficult to talk about what is a viable option now, as we are late in the 6th month of their captivity, because first of all is the fear of something that might endanger them further; but second is also, it you do have a good idea, something that should be done, I don’t think we should say it out loud and let the Iranians hear about it.  My criticism—I don’t mind criticizing what has been done and, frankly, I don’t think the President has done anything that he couldn’t have done five months ago or longer, and then was the time to—when all the means of diplomacy failed—then was the time to look at the options, which only the President knows that he has, as to what he thought might, with the least chance of any violence, that might exert the greatest pressure on them, and then give them a date certain and say either the hostages are released on that date or this goes into effect.

And he has used the term military force now as a possibility, but that could include what you’ve said, mining.  It could include blockade.  If we mined, and I am sure if we did it, those would be the kind of mines that are activated by radio and can be deactivated, but we would have to also prevent Russian mine sweepers from going in there and trying to take them out if they wanted to try that.  I wonder whether they are prepared for a possible escalation of conflict with us at this time.  They are aggressive against an Afghanistan and in Africa, and so forth; and, even though they have a lead on us in virtually everything, I don’t think that maybe they are prepared at this time to dare the possible—well, they don’t want the confrontation directly with the United States.

MR. SMITH:  Wouldn’t it be quite a risk to find out whether they were willing or not, Ambassador Bush, when they are operating just on the other side of the border from their supply depots and we will be operating 8,000 miles away from ours?

MR. BUSH:  No.  It would not be that big a risk in my judgment.  I have been to that part of the Gulf.  I did business in that part of the world.  In my judgment, the situation in Iraq, where you see Iraq pulling away from the Soviet Union, has a bearing on this and, in my judgment, the situation in Pakistan; where you have both China concerned and us concerned about Afghanistan for very different reasons, the Chinese with their special relationship with Pakistan, where you have Islam concerned, almost united in their concern about the Soviets; where you have a Soviet Union that it is overcommitted in Afghanistan as it is, I don’t believe your hypothesis is correct, Mr. Smith.  I don’t believe the Soviets would escalate and I believe that is an option that the President should give very serious consideration to.  And you’re not talking, when you get into a situation of mining, of having to cede it away.  Once you mine, with no matter how many mines you put in, insurance rates skyrocket.  And for all intents and purposes, commerce screeches to a halt.  And I think it should be considered.  I think it’s for the President to make the determination.

One thing I learned from my experience in foreign affairs is that there is a highly classified body of information that only a handful of people, properly, in my judgment, have access to, and that is the President and the handful of his top people.  And so if that decision is made by them, it would have my support; and I don’t believe that the risk you cite is the risk to be concerned about.  I think the risk would rather be internally in Iran when you are dealing with outrageous, reckless people who have no respect for international law.  They’ve already made a hostile act under any interpretation of international law, seizing our embassy.  And, so, I wouldn’t worry about the Soviets in this context for the reasons I have given you.

MR. SMITH:  What about the option of doing nothing at all?  Clearly, the most important fact about Iran today is it is a country that hasn’t completed its revolution.  There are probably more pro-U.S. people in Iran than we realize from watching television and seeing only anti-U.S. militants.  And if a showdown inside Iran, which may have begun already with the students fighting one another, might see our side, the side that wants to get along with us when; but if we use force, we may force Iran into Russian arms and endanger the hostages.  Wouldn’t it be worthwhile being patient awhile longer since the hostages are apparently physically in good condition?

MR. REAGAN:  I don’t think they have seen it as patience.  I think they have seen it as weakness.  And they have no respect for us.  They have humiliated us.  One of their officials that we sent back just the other day, one of the diplomats, his speech when he arrived was boasting of how they rubbed our face in the dirt all this time.

But what if the United States had, in those first hours, had used all the diplomatic things that we have done—not that commission from the U.N., because that isn’t even in the U.N. Charter, and I think it was a terrible precedent for us to set that the U.N. could do such a thing outside the Charter—but all the diplomatic efforts we could make peacefully to get them back; and then had used on of these and, let us say, hypothetically, the mining of the harbor, the blockade.  First of all, at that time they were greatly dependent on outside commerce and dependent for about 30 percent of their food.  Now they have adjusted, and for us to put sanctions on them, our trade has shrunk down to the place that is hardly going to affect them at all.  But, then, if we had done that forcefully, and in those first few days, and gotten our hostages, back, then we could have said to them, “Now, look.  We don’t want any trouble with you.  We would like to be friends with you.  We’d like to work with you, and we could be helpful to you.  And you’ve got a neighbor up north I am sure you don’t want in here.”  And I think they would have listened to us.  But now why would they listen to us when they look to themselves as stronger than we are because of the way we’ve gone on month after month letting this humiliation occur.

MR. SMITH:  How about Afghanistan?  Congressman Sam Stratten of New York, who has been to the Pakistan border of Afghanistan, says the Afghan rebels are using ancient weapons, rifles of World War I vintage, and he feels that we should send them very considerable aid since the Russians are accusing us of it anyhow.  Do you believe we should?

MR. BUSH:  Absolutely.  And I said it from the very beginning.  And, look, if you have a brutal aggression and you are not willing to help, and I think the way to do it was through Pakistan, if you are not willing to help, what possible hope do countries have that want to be free of this kind of aggression?  You’ve got to start in foreign policy with your definition of what the Soviet Union intends.

Now, I believe the evidence is overwhelming that they seek superiority, not parity; and I believe when they see us weak, say Cubans are in Africa as a stabilizing influence, they are going to go in there and use that stabilization to spread hegemony, as the Chinese would say.  And so my view is that they are, the Soviets, are aggressive; they have overstated in Afghanistan; they have bitten off more than, in my judgment, they should be allowed to digest; and I think that the best answer to it is for them to know that the United States is going to keep its commitments.  Our allies, everybody gripes about our allies; and yes, they ought to be out supporting us for what we’ve done.  But they don’t know that they can believe Jimmy Carter.  They think that he’s going to change his mind on whatever he does in the Mideast just as he did on the enhance radiation weapon in Germany.

MR. REAGAN:  It took him three years to find out that the Soviets couldn’t be trusted.

I agree completely, where people want to be free from Soviet or Cuban domination where the proxy troops are used to the Cubans, the United States should be willing to provide weapons to any men that want to fight for their freedom against those hostile forces.

MR. SMITH:  Do you believe, Governor Reagan, still that there should be a blockade of Cube, a complete blockade?

MR. REAGAN:  Well, suggested that as a hypothetical; again, and it was based on this thing that we both have said here, and that is that only the President and a few people have knowledge of all the options, but I said with regard to Afghanistan.  The President, I think, lowered the credibility of the United States when he made, in diplomatic language, what was an extremely serious warning to the Soviets not to invade Afghanistan, indeed, he even used the term that serious consequences would follow.  Now, he knew we had no way to back that up there.  There wasn’t anything we could do.  We weren’t going to put in troops and try to chase them out.  So they invaded, and the world saw us once again still standing here, just as we are still standing after he made the speech that he wouldn’t accept the Soviet brigade in Cuba.  But we accepted it.

And so my feeling is that—what I said at the time was that we ought to have a plan.  We ought to have a strategy of our own.  We ought to have contingency plans where we can look ahead and say:  Well, if they should do this or do that, this is what we can do.  And I propose that there might be pressures we could exert on the Soviet Union where the logistics are not 10,000 miles against us, but not in their backyard.  And I said let me give one hypothetical idea, and I said there may be others and better options than this—but here we have a Soviet satellite 90 miles off our shore.  And instead of threatening sanctions or threatening the Olympics or anything else, why couldn’t we blockade Cube and then say to the,, “When your troops get out of Afghanistan, we will drop the blockade around Cuba.”  And I think this could exert great pressure.

MR. BUSH:  Here we have a fundamental difference, because it wasn’t Cubans that invaded Afghanistan; it was Russians.  And we have a hemispheric problem today, it seems to me, and I believe that if you will go back and, look, blockage connotes in navel parlance, war, interdiction of shipping, interdiction of aircraft.

Kennedy didn’t use the word “blockade.”  He used the word “quarantine.”  To quarantine Cube, it would require today because of the decline in the United States Navy, according to a former chief of naval operations, the entire Atlantic fleet.  Now, I don’t believe I have a difference with Governor Reagan.   As much as I detest what Castro is doing, if Afghanistan were invaded or someplace in the Middle East were threatened when I was President, I would not respond against Cuba.  I believe that would be bad in terms of the hemisphere.  We got problems with Cuba?  One on one with those problems.  Don’t link them in in order to solve something halfway around the world.  That’s my view of foreign policy.

MR. REAGAN:  There is a disagreement in naval circles, then, too, because I have had some naval advice about the practicality of the blockade, also.  But don’t we have to realistically face up to the fact that our troubles in this hemisphere and Central America and on down in South America are being generated by Castro’s Cuba as well as in the Caribbean where they are also threatening now to choke off our lifelines, and it is a problem that has to faced one day.  But I think that Russia had enough of a presence there.  It has fighter bombers there; it has submarines there; it has a brigade we know about that holds combat maneuvers there.  Russia provides, and I guess, about a tanker a week with oil for Cuba.  I don’t think they could stand a blockade very long, and I think a little call on the hot line with this kind of a threat might get the withdrawal of the troops from Afghanistan, because it would be a pressure on them.

MR. SMITH:  Ambassador Bush, what do we do about Cuba which is, as everyone says, 90 miles off our border, is virtually a Soviet outpost, has an imitator now in the island of Grenada, has 500 advisors in Jamaica and some in Guyana, and influence is spreading all the time.  And what makes it seem ridiculous is it is a basket case of a nation, about to collapse if Russia doesn’t hold it up.

 MR. BUSH:  That is right, but when Jimmy Carter came in, he gave a great big abrasso, stop the SR-71 flights and treated Cuba with civility while knocking the hell out of some of our allies in the further part of Latin America.  And people look at us and they say, “What is going on there?”

This man has made a conscious decision, in my judgment, Castro, to export revolution, not support it.  Communist make this very interesting dialectic, this distinction between the support of revolution and the export.  They’ve made this decision, and, yes, Grenada is now having their alliance with Castro.  Guyana has been in trouble before—Grenada first.  Guyana has had their trouble before.  Jamaica, their police and security force is being trained by Cuba, but that is just the tip of the iceberg.  The rest of it is down in Central America today where I am absolutely convinced that Castro is not only fomenting but supplying the military equipment to stimulate revolution.

So what do you do about it?  You change your naïve foreign policy that considers this guy as some kind of person that is really going to live comfortably with inside that island.  And then, you certainly you would adhere to human rights.  The United States always must adhere to that.  But Jimmy Carter didn’t invent morality in foreign policy.

And so what I would do is I would keep our strategic interests in mind as I pushed for equity and change.

MR. SMITH:  Well, the next debate, I am going to ask you what you would do about Cuba.

MR. BUSH:  I just told you.

MR. SMITH:  But now we are going to have some questions from the audience.

MR. GROSSBERG:  My name is David Grossberg, and I would like to know:  Do you think the children of illegal aliens should be allowed to attend the Texas public schools free, or do you think that their parents should pay for their education?

MR. BUSH:  Who are you addressing that to?

MR. SMITH:  I think you are first in this.

MR. REAGAN:  He was looking right at you.

MR. BUSH:  I was afraid he was.

Look, I would like to see something done about the illegal alien problem that would be so sensitive and so understanding about labor needs and human needs that that problem wouldn’t come up; but today if those people are here, I would reluctantly say I think they would get whatever it is that they are, you know, what the society is giving to their neighbors.  But the problem has to be solved.  The problem has to be solved, because as we have kind of made illegal some kinds of labor that I’d like to see legal, we are doing two things:  we are creating a whole society of really honorable, decent family-loving people that are in violation of the law; and, secondly, we are exacerbating relations with Mexico.

The answer to your question is much more fundamental than whether they attend Houston schools it seems to me.  I don’t want to see a whole—if they are living here, I don’t want to see a whole—think of six and eight years old kids, being made, you know, one, totally uneducated and made to feel that they are living with outside the law.

Let’s address ourselves to the fundamentals.  These are good people, strong people.  Part of my family is a Mexican.

MR. REAGAN:  I think the time has come that the United States and our neighbors, particularly our neighbor to the South, should have a better understanding and a better relationship than we have ever had.  And I think that we haven’t been sensitive enough to our size and our power.  They have a problem with 40 to 50 percent unemployment.  Now, this cannot continue without the possibility arising with regard to that other country that we talked about, of Cuba and what it is stirring up, of the possibility of trouble below the border, and we could have a very hostile and strange neighbor on our border.  Rather than making them—we are talking about putting up a fence.  Why don’t we work out some recognition of our mutual problems, make it possible for them to come here legally with work permit, and then, while they’re working and earning here, they pay taxes here.  And when they want to go back, they can go back.  And they can cross, and open the border both ways by understanding their problems.

This is the only safety valve right now they have with that unemployment that probably keeps the lid from blowing off down there.  And I think we could have a fine relationship, and it would solve the problem you mentioned, also.

MR. SMITH:  Yes, sir?

MR. APPELL:  I’m Michael Appel.  I hope both of you gentlemen will address yourselves to this one:  Local filling stations are said to be cutting the gasoline prices so as to exhaust their currently abundant supplies on the advice of their parent companies in order that their next allocations will not be decreased.

How do you feel about this practice?

MR. BUSH:  Is that one for me, too?  I will be glad to respond, unless you want a crack at it first.  Go ahead.

MR. REAGAN:  Well, here again, this is part of what I think the great energy crisis, like inflation, is caused by government.  And part of it is from that energy agency and the allocation system.  Once upon time the allocation of that product, like any other product, was made by the marketplace, supply and demand.  Today you have a government agency that is dictating where the gasoline, where the heating oil, where the diesel oil, where it will go and trying to guess how much should go where.  For example, recently, while you are talking about too much here, down in Southern Florida, in fact, during the primary there, they were running into a shortage because the agency had decided in the winter time people drive less than they do in the summertime in South Florida all winter.  And people were driving just as much and probably even more people coming down there as tourist.

California, when we lined up at the gas stations, they started allocations on the 1972 figures.  We’ve got 4 million more automobiles in California then we had in 1972.  Let us turn the energy industry back and let the marketplace dictate things like that, and we won’t have these problems.

MR. BUSH:  The only thing I would add is that that example makes a good case against wage and price controls.  You have given a good example in the energy business, the energy department saying put the gasoline where the people aren’t, back when we had a gasoline problem.  And I oppose wage and price controls, and this is a good example of price control that has distorted supply rather than helped, in my judgment.

MR. SMITH:  Yes, ma’am?

MISS MANLEY:  Mr. Bush, Mr. Reagan, my name is Carla Manley, and I’d like to ask:  With college costs up to $6,000 per year, even at state universities, would you okay tax cuts for families with college students?

This is particularly important to students who are in middle-income families who are above financial-need scholarships, but still feel the strain of college education.

MR. BUSH:  I have supported, as a Member of the United States Congress, tuition tax credits.  How big they can be has to, in my judgment, be considered along with the entire economy.  Because I don’t want to stand here and say we are going to maximize, fund that to the fullest, when I am talking cutting back on some kinds of expenditures.  But I favor tuition tax credits; I favor the student loan program.  I don’t favor abuses in the student loan program that permit people with $100,000 income to get--families that way—to get loans at subsidized rates.

MR. REAGAN:  We are in agreement on that.  I have supported the idea of tuition tax credits, also, and the loan program.  In California we had a state scholarship program that was only $4 million when I became Governor.  It was 43 when I left.  See, I had to wash dishes in the girls’ dormitory to go to school.  That was one of the better jobs I’ve had.

But I agree with that.  But isn’t it basically again, aren’t we getting back to the first problem, that the answer is that again is a casualty of inflation.  And until we get back down to common sense, reasonable prices, we are going to have these kinds of problems.

MR. SMITH:  Yes, ma’am?

MRS. GORE:  Mr. Bush, Mr. Reagan, I am Ravina Gore.

Would you please tell us who some of the people are that you are considering as your vice Presidential running mate when you are nominated.

MR. SMITH:  I think this is Mr. Reagan’s turn to start.

 MR. REAGAN:  I thought I answered the other one first. 

Well, ma’am, I don’t know what the answer is going to be from the other end of the stage, but I can tell you this one, whether it is fear of jinxing myself or whatever it is, I have refused to allow myself or whatever it is, I have refused to allow myself to even consider that.  I think there is a wealth of talent in our party and I have refused to let myself even turn my mind to that, unless and until I am much closer to seeing the required number of delegates for the nomination.

MR. SMITH:  Mr. Bush.

MR. BUSH:  Even with my new found optimism out of Pennsylvania, I have not gotten far enough along to think about the name of the person.

Two criteria:  he or she must be able to take over, must be able to take over the minute the President was incapacitated; and secondly, a certain degree of loyalty to the President’s views.  Not ideological conformity, not total agreement on every single one of these troubling issues that face this country, but a willingness to support the President.  I will be honest with you, and I don’t agree with him on hardly any issue, Vice President Mondale has been a good Vice President in this second regard for Jimmy Carter.  Those are the two major criteria that I would look for.

MR. REAGAN:  I must say, also, it goes without saying, that I would think that anyone that you would recommend to the convention you would have to feel would carry out the programs that you had promised the people you were going to implement.  Therefore, whoever I pick would have to agree with the Kemp-Roth Tax Bill.

MR. SMITH:  Thank you gentlemen.  Now, we have about one minute for closing statements.

MR. BUSH:  Was that Mr. Roth that just came out for a 30 million tax cut?

MR. SMITH:  That’s three seconds off your closing statement.  A minute for your closing statement.

well, I am very pleased to be back in Texas.  I am looking forward to the campaign in this my home state where I have lived for 30 years.  I believe that this kind of function, and I thank the League of Women voters, is an extraordinarily good thing.  Spell out the differences.  Spell them out so the voter can best determine who can beat Jimmy Carter.

My view is this:  If we have a sensible economic policy that does not over-promise, and we couple that with a foreign policy based on experience, where the United States will keep its word, strengthen its intelligence capability and adhere to the values that have mad us strong and earned this respect, we can help people at home and we can restore the respect we’ve lost abroad.

Thank you very much.

MR. REAGAN:  In the 18th century we created here in this land, the freest, most unique society that has ever been known to man.

In the 19th century, we built the greatest industrial power that the world has ever seen.

And we spent most of the 20th century apologizing.  And I don’t know what we are apologizing for.  I think that living Americans today have fought harder, done more for the dignity of man than any people who have ever lived on this earth.

And I also share the view that Jimmy Carter must be removed from office.  If I thought someone else had a better a chance to beat him than I did, I wouldn’t be a candidate, I would be supporting that someone else.

But in these last 20 years of this century, we must make sure that the young people and the people who are going to follow us will have the same opportunity, the same glittering opportunity that has been ours through 200 years of our history.  It is all here.  It is all possible to the American people, and I want to see the American people have that chance without government crowding them down and becoming the all-powerful instrument in their lives controlling their destinies.

Thank you.

MR. SMITH:  Ladies and gentlemen, that concludes our forum for tonight.

 I want, on behalf of the League of Women Voters to thank Ambassador Bush and Governor Reagan for being with us.  They did agree on some very important things.  I hope you kept notes of that.  But they didn’t disagree as much as I wanted them to, which is very bad for show biz, but probably very good for the Republican Party.

The League of Women Voters believes that this forum series and its upcoming Presidential Debate Series is vital to the interests of our nation, especially at this time.

Thank you all and good night.

#
#Republican National Convention Acceptance Speech
#

Mr. Chairman, delegates to the Convention, my fellow citizens of this great nation: With a deep awareness of the responsibility conferred by your trust, I accept your nomination for the Presidency of the United States. I do so with deep gratitude.

I am very proud of our party tonight. This convention has shown to all America a party united, with positive programs for solving the nations problems; a party ready to build a new consensus with all those across the land who share a community of values embodied in these words: family, work, neighborhood, peace and freedom.

I know we have had a quarrel or two in our party, but only as to the method of attaining a goal. There was no argument about the goal. As President, I will establish a liaison with the 50 Governors to encourage them to eliminate, wherever it exists, discrimination against women. I will monitor Federal laws to insure their implementation and to add statutes if they are needed.

More than anything else, I want my candidacy to unify our country; to renew the American spirit and sense of purpose. I want to carry our message to every American, regardless of party affiliation, who is a member of this community of shared values.

Never before in our history have Americans been called upon to face three grave threats to our very existence, any one of which could destroy us. We face a disintegrating economy, a weakened defense and an energy policy based on the sharing of scarcity.

The major issue of this campaign is the direct political, personal and moral responsibility of Democratic party leadership-in the White House and in Congress-for this unprecedented calamity which has befallen us. They tell us they have done the most that humanly could be done. They say that the United States has had its day in the sun; that our nation has passed its zenith. They expect you to tell your children that the American people no longer have the will to cope with their problems; that the future will be one of sacrifice and few opportunities.

My fellow citizens I utterly reject that view. The American people, the most generous on earth, who created the highest standard of living, are not going to accept the notion that we can only make a better world for others by moving backwards ourselves. Those who believe we can have no business leading the nation. I will not stand by and watch this great country destroy itself under mediocre leadership that drifts from one crisis to the next, eroding our national will and purpose. We have come together here because the American people deserve better from those to whom they entrust our nations highest offices, and we stand united in our resolve to do something about it.

We need a rebirth of the American tradition of leadership at every level of government and in private life as well. The United States of America is unique in world history because it has a genius for leaders many leaders on many levels. But, back in 1976, Mr. Carter said, Trust me. And a lot of people did. Now, many of those people are out of work. Many have seen their savings eaten away by inflation. Many others on fixed incomes, especially the elderly, have watched helplessly as the cruel tax of inflation wasted away their purchasing power. And, today a great many who trusted Mr. Carter wonder if we can survive the Carter policies of national defense.

Trust me government asks that we concentrate our hopes and dreams on one man; that we trust him to do whats best for us. My view of government places trust not in one person or one party, but in those values that transcend persons and parties. The trust is where it belongs in the people. The responsibility to live up to that trust is where it belongs, in their elected leaders. That kind of relationship, between the people and their elected leaders, is a special kind of compact; an agreement among themselves to build a community and abide by its laws.

Three hundred and sixty years ago, in 1620, a group of families dared to cross a mighty ocean to build a future for themselves in a new world. When they arrived at Plymouth, Massachusetts, they formed what they called a compact; an agreement among themselves to build a community and abide by its laws. The single act the voluntary binding together of free people to live under the law set the pattern for what was to come.

A century and a half later, the descendants of those people pledged their lives, their fortunes and their sacred honor to found this nation. Some forfeited their fortunes and their lives; none sacrificed honor.

Four score and seven years later, Abraham Lincoln called upon the people of all America to renew their dedication and their commitment of, for and by the people. Isnt it once again time to renew our compact of freedom; to pledge to each other all that is best in our lives; all that gives meaning to them for the sake of this, our beloved and blessed land?

Together, let us make this a new beginning. Let us make a commitment to care for the needy; to teach our children the values and the virtues handed down to us by our families; to have the courage to defend those values and the willingness to sacrifice for them.

Let us pledge to restore, in our time, the American spirit of voluntary service, of cooperation, of private and community initiative; a spirit that flows like a deep and mighty river through the history of our nation.

As your nominee, I pledge to restore to the federal government the capacity to do the peoples work without dominating their lives. I pledge to you a government that will not only work well, but wisely; its ability to act tempered by prudence, and its willingness to do good balanced by the knowledge that government is never more dangerous than when our desire to have it help us blinds us to its great power to harm us.

The first Republican President once said, While the people retain their virtue and their vigilance, no Administration by any extreme of wickedness or folly can seriously injure the government in the short space of four years.

If Mr. Lincoln could see whats happened in these last three-and-half years, he might hedge a little on that statement. But, with the virtues that are our legacy as a free people and with the vigilance that sustains liberty, we still have time to use our renewed compact to overcome the injuries that have been done to America these past three-and-a half years.

First we must overcome something the present Administration has cooked up: a new and altogether indigestible economic stew, one part inflation, one part high unemployment, one part recession, one part runaway taxes, one part deficit spending and seasoned by an energy crisis. Its an economic stew that has turned the national stomach. It is as if Mr. Carter had set out to prove, once and for all, that economics is indeed a dismal science.

Ours are not problems of abstract economic theory. These are problems of flesh and blood; problems that cause pain and destroy the moral fiber of real people who should not suffer the further indignity of being told by the White House that it is all somehow their fault. We do not have inflation because, as Mr. Carter says, we have lived too well.

The head of a government which has utterly refused to live within its means and which has, in the last few days, told us that this years deficit will be $60 billion, dares to point the finger of blame at business and labor, both of which have been engaged in a losing struggle just trying to stay even.

High taxes, we are told, are somehow good for us, as if, when government spends our money it isnt inflationary, but when we spend it, it is. Those who preside over the worst energy shortage in our history tell us to use less, so that we will run out of oil, gasoline and natural gas a little more slowly. Conservation is desirable, of course, for we must not waste energy. But conservation is not the sole answer to our energy needs.

America must get to work producing more energy. The Republican program for solving economic problems is based on growth and productivity. Large amounts of oil and natural gas lay beneath our land and off our shores, untouched because the present Administration seems to believe the American people would rather see more regulation, taxes and controls than more energy.

Coal offers great potential. So does nuclear energy produced under rigorous safety standards. It could supply electricity for thousands of industries and millions of jobs and homes. It must not be thwarted by a tiny minority opposed to economic growth which often finds friendly ears in regulatory agencies for its obstructionist campaigns.

Make no mistake. We will not permit the safety of our people or our environmental heritage to be jeopardized, but we are going to reaffirm that the economic prosperity of our people is a fundamental part of our environment.

Our problems are both acute and chronic, yet all we hear from those in positions of leadership are the same tired proposals for more government tinkering, more meddling and more control all of which led us to this state in the first place.

Can anyone look at the record of this Administration and say Well done? Can anyone compare the state of our economy when the Carter Administration took office with where we are today and say, Keep up the good work? Can anyone look at our reduced standing in the world today and say, Lets have four more years of this?

I believe the American people are going to answer these questions the first week of November and their answer will be, No weve had enough. And, when the American people have spoken, it will be up to us beginning next January 20th to offer an Administration and Congressional leadership of competence and more than a little courage.

We must have the clarity of vision to see the difference between what is essential and what is merely desirable; and then the courage to use this insight to bring our government back under control and make it acceptable to the people.

We Republicans believe it is essential that we maintain both the forward momentum of economic growth and the strength of the safety net beneath those in society who need help. We also believe it is essential that the integrity of all aspects of Social Security be preserved.

Beyond these essentials, I believe it is clear our federal government is overgrown and overweight. Indeed, it is time for our government to go no a diet. Therefore, my first act as Chief Executive will be to impose an immediate and thorough freeze on federal hiring. Then, we are going to enlist the very best minds from business, labor and whatever quarter to conduct a detailed review of every department, bureau and agency that lives by federal appropriation. We are also going to enlist the help and ideas of many dedicated and hard-working government employees at all levels who want a more efficient government as much as the rest of us do. I know that many are demoralized by the confusion and waste they confront in their work as a result of failed and failing policies.

Our instructions to the groups we enlist will be simple and direct. We will remind them that government programs exist at the sufferance of the American taxpayer and are paid for with money earned by working men and women. Any program that represents a waste of their money a theft from their pocketbooks must have that waste eliminated or the program must go by Executive Order where possible; by Congressional action where necessary. Everything that can be run more effectively by state and local governments we shall turn over to state and local government, along with the funding sources to pay for it. We are going to put an end to the money merry go round where our money becomes Washingtons money, to be spent by the states and cities only if they spend it exactly the way the federal bureaucrats tell them to.

I will not accept the excuse that the federal government has grown so big and powerful that it is beyond the control of any President, any Administration or Congress. We are going to put an end to the notion that the American taxpayer exists to fund the federal government. The federal government exists to serve the American people and to be accountable to the American people. On January 20th, we are going to re-establish that truth.

Also on that date we are going to initiate action to get substantial relief for our taxpaying citizens and action to put people back to work. None of this will be based on any new form of monetary tinkering or fiscal sleight-of-hand. We will simply apply to government the common sense we all use in our daily lives.

Work and family are at the center of our lives; the foundation of our dignity as a free people. When we deprive people of what they have earned, or take away their jobs, we destroy their dignity and undermine their families. We cannot support our families unless there are jobs; and we cannot have jobs unless people have both money to invest and the faith to invest it.

These are concepts that stem from the foundation of an economic system that for more than two hundred years has helped us master a continent, create a previously undreamed of prosperity for our people and has fed millions of others around the globe. That system will continue to serve us in the future if our government will stop ignoring the basic values on which it was built and stop betraying the trust and good will of the American workers who keep it going.

The American people are carrying the heaviest peacetime tax burden in our nations history and it will grow even heavier, under present law, next January. This burden is crushing our ability and incentive to save, invest and produce. We are taxing ourselves into economic exhaustion and stagnation. This must stop. We must halt this fiscal self-destruction and restore sanity to our economic system.

I have long advocated a 30 percent reduction in income tax rates over a period of three years. This phased tax reduction would begin with a 10 percent down payment tax cut in 1981, which the Republicans in Congress and I have already proposed.

A phased reduction of tax rates would go a long way toward easing the heavy burden on the American people. But, we should not stop here.

Within the context of economic conditions and appropriate budget priorities during each fiscal year of my Presidency, I would strive to go further. This would include improvement in business depreciation taxes so we can stimulate investment in order to get plants and equipment replaced, put more Americans back to work and put our nation back on the road to being competitive in world commerce. We will also work to reduce the cost of government as a percentage of our Gross National Product.

The first task of national leadership is to set honest and realistic priorities in our policies and our budget and I pledge that my Administration will do that.

When I talk of tax cuts, I am reminded that every major tax cut in this century has strengthened the economy, generated renewed productivity and ended up yielding new revenues for the government by creating new investment, new jobs and more commerce among our people.

The present administration has been forced by us Republicans to play follow the leader with regard to a tax cut. But, we must take with the proverbial grain of salt any tax cut proposed by those who have given us the greatest tax increase in our history.

When those in leadership give us tax increases and tell us we must also do with less, have they thought about those who have always had less especially the minorities? This is like telling them that just as they step on the first rung of the ladder of opportunity, the ladder is being pulled up. That may be the Democratic leaderships message to the minorities, but it wont be ours. Our message will be; we have to move ahead, but were not going to leave anyone behind.

Thanks to the economic policies of the Democratic party, millions of Americans find themselves out of work. Millions more have never even had a fair chance to learn new skills, hold a decent job, seize the opportunity to climb the ladder and secure for themselves and their families a share in the prosperity of this nation.

It is time to put Americans back to work; to make our cities and towns resound with the confident voices of men and women of all races, nationalities and faiths bringing home to their families a decent paycheck they can cash for money.

For those without skills, well find a way to help them get skills. For those without job opportunities, well stimulate new opportunities, particularly in the inner cities where they live. For those who have abandoned hope, well restore hope and well welcome them into a great national crusade to make America great again!

When we move from domestic affairs and cast our eyes abroad, we see an equally sorry chapter in the record of the present Administration.

A Soviet combat brigade trains in Cuba, just 90 miles from our shores.
A Soviet army of invasion occupies Afghanistan, further threatening our vital interests in the Middle East.
Americas defense strength is at its lowest ebb in a generation, while the Soviet Union is vastly outspending us in both strategic and conventional arms.
Our European allies, looking nervously at the growing menace from the East, turn to us for leadership and fail to find it.
And incredibly more than 50 of our fellow Americans have been held captive for over eight months by a dictatorial foreign power that holds us up to ridicule before the world.
Adversaries large and small test our will and seek to confound our resolve, but the Carter Administration gives us weakness when we need strength; vacillation when the times demand firmness.

Why? Because the Carter Administration live in the world of make-believe. Every day, it dreams up a response to that days troubles, regardless of what happened yesterday and what will happen tomorrow. The Administration lives in a world where mistakes, even very big ones, have no consequence.

The rest of us, however, live in the real world. It is here that disasters are overtaking our nation without any real response from the White House.

I condemn the Administrations make-believe; its self deceit and - above all its transparent hypocrisy. For example, Mr. Carter says he supports the volunteer army, but he lets military pay and benefits slip so low that many of our enlisted personnel are actually eligible for food stamps. Re-enlistment rates drop and, just recently, after he fought all week against a proposal to increase the pay of our men and women in uniform, he helicoptered out to our carrier the USS Nimitz, which was returning from long months of duty. He told the crew that he advocated better pay for them and their comrades! Where does he really stand, now that hes back on shore?

Ill tell you where I stand. I do not favor a peacetime draft or registration, but I do favor pay and benefit levels that will attract and keep highly motivated men and women in our volunteer forces and an active reserve trained and ready for an instant call in case of an emergency.

An Annapolis graduate may be at the helm of the ship of state, but the ship has no rudder. Critical decisions are made at times almost in Marx Brothers fashion, but who can laugh? Who was not embarrassed when the Administration handed a major propaganda victory in the United Nations to the enemies of Israel, our staunch Middle East ally for three decades, and then claimed that the American vote was a mistake, the result of a failure of communication between the President, his Secretary of State and his UN Ambassador?

Who does not feel a growing sense of unease as our allies, facing repeated instances of an amateurish and confused Administration; reluctantly conclude that America is unwilling or unable to fulfill its obligations as leader of the free world?

Who does not feel rising alarm when the question in any discussion of foreign policy is no longer, Should we do something?, but Do we have the capacity to do anything?

The Administration which has brought us to this state is seeking your endorsement for four more years of weakness, indecision, mediocrity and incompetence. No American should vote until he or she has asked, is the United States stronger and more respected now than it was three-and-a-half years ago? Is the world today a safer place in which we live?

It is the responsibility of the President of the United States, in working for peace, to insure that the safety of our people cannot successfully be threatened by a hostile foreign power. As President, fulfilling that responsibility will be my Number One priority.

We are not a warlike people. Quite the opposite. We always seek to live in peace. We resort to force infrequently and with great reluctance and only after we have determined that it is absolutely necessary. We are awed and rightly so by the forces of destruction at loose in the world in this nuclear era. But neither can we be nae or foolish. Four times in my lifetime America has gone to war, bleeding the lives of its young men into the sands of beachheads, the fields of Europe and the jungles and rice paddies of Asia. We know only too well that war comes not when the forces of freedom are strong, but when they are weak. It is then that tyrants are tempted.

We simply cannot learn these lessons the hard way again without risking our destruction.

Of all the objectives we seek, first and foremost is the establishment of lasting world peace. We must always stand ready to negotiate in good faith, ready to pursue any reasonable avenue that holds forth the promise of lessening tensions and furthering the prospects of peace. But let our friends and those who may wish us ill take note: the United States has an obligation to its citizens and to the people of the world never to let those who would destroy freedom dictate the future course of human life on this planet.

I would never regard my election as proof that we have renewed our resolve to preserve world peace and freedom. This nation will once again be strong enough to do that.

This evening marks the last step save one of a campaign that has taken Nancy and me from one end of this great land to the other, over many months and thousands and thousands of miles. There are those who question the way we choose a President; who say that our process imposes difficult and exhausting burdens on those who seek the office. I have not found it so.

It is impossible to capture in words the splendor of this vast continent which God has granted as our portion of his creation. There are no words to express the extraordinary strength and character of this breed of people we call Americans.

Everywhere we have me thousands of Democrats, Independents and Republicans from all economic conditions and walks of life bound together in that community of shared values of family, work, neighborhood, peace and freedom. They are concerned, yes, but they are the kind of men and women Tom Paine had in mind when he wrote during the darkest days of the American Revolution We have it in our power to begin the world over again.

Nearly one-hundred-and-fifty years after Tom Paine wrote those words, an American President told the generation of the Great Depression that it had a rendezvous with destiny. I believe this generation of Americans today also has a rendezvous with destiny.

Tonight, let us dedicate ourselves to renewing the American Compact. I ask you not simply to Trust me, but to trust your values our values and to hold me responsible for living up to them. I ask you to trust that American spirit which knows no ethnic, religious, social, political, regional or economic boundaries; the spirit that burned with zeal in the hearts of millions of immigrants from every corner of the earth who came here in search of freedom.

Some say that spirit no longer exists. But I have seen it I have felt it all across this land; in the big cities, the small towns and in rural America. The American spirit is still there, ready to blaze into life if you and I are willing to do what has to be done; the practical, down to earth things that will stimulate our economy, increase productivity and put America back to work.

The time is now to limit federal spending; to insist on a stable monetary reform and to free ourselves from imported oil.

The time is now to resolve that the basis of a firm and principled foreign policy is one that takes the world as it is and seeks to change it by leadership and example; not by lecture and harangue.

The time is now to say that while we shall seek new friendships and expand and improve others, we shall not do so by breaking our word or casting aside old friends and allies.

And the time is now to redeem promises once made to the American people by another candidate, in another time and another place. He said, For three long years I have been going up and down this country preaching that government federal, state and local costs too much. I shall not stop that preaching. As an immediate program of action, we must abolish useless offices. We must eliminate unnecessary functions of government.

we must consolidate subdivisions of government and, like the private citizen, give up luxuries which we can no longer afford. I propose to you, my friends, and through you that government of all kinds, big and little be made solvent and that the example be set by the President of the United States and his cabinet. So said Franklin Delano Roosevelt in his acceptance speech to the Democratic National Convention in July, 1932.

The time is now, my fellow Americans, to recapture our destiny, to take it into our own hands. But, to do this will take many of us, working together. I ask you tonight to volunteer your help in this cause so we carry our message throughout the land.

Yes, isnt now the time that we, the people, carried out these unkept promises? Let us pledge to each other and to all America on this July day 48 years later, we intend to do just that.

At the end, Reagan departed from his prepared text:

I have thought of something that is not a part of my speech and Im worried over whether I should do it. Can we doubt that only a divine providence placed this land, this island of freedom, here as a refuge for all those people in the world who yearn to breath freely: Jews and Christians enduring persecution behind the Iron Curtain, the boat people of Southeast Asia, of Cuba and of Haiti, the victims of drought and famine in Africa, the freedom fighters of Afghanistan and our own countrymen held in savage captivity.

I'll confess that Ive been a little afraid to suggest what Im going to suggest. Im more afraid not to. Can we begin our crusade joined together in a moment of silent prayer?

God Bless America.

#
#VETERANS OF FOREIGN WARS CONVENTION, Chicago, Illinois, PEACE: Restoring the Margin of Safety
#

Thank you Commander Vanderclute.

Four weeks ago, I was deeply honored to go before a national convention of my party and accept the greatest honor they can bestow: their nomination for the Presidency of the United States.

What a wonderful pleasure it is now to come before you and accept your endorsement for that same high office.

I know you have broken a 80-year precedent to make this endorsement, and I only hope that four years from now you will be as happy with me as I am with you today. Because, my friends, nothing would mean more to me as President than to live up to your trust.

I also know full well today that the last four commanders of the VFW have all been Democrats. But this endorsement sends a message ringing across the land: when it comes to keeping America strong, when it comes to keeping America great, when it comes to keeping America at peace, then none of us can afford to be simply a Democrat or a Republican we must all stand united as Americans.

And that is what I intend to do in this campaign and in the next four years: to unite people of every background and faith in a great crusade to restore the America of our dreams.

America has been sleepwalking far too long. We have to snap out of it, and with your help, thats exactly what were going to do.

The high and noble purpose of your great organization, to honor the dead by helping the living, is personified by your gratuitous representation of veterans, their widows and orphans in claims with the Veteran Administration through your nationwide network of skilled service officers and, also, before the various discharge review and correction boards within the Department of Defense.

With respect to your legislative efforts to assist veterans, my colleagues inform me that your representatives in your Washington office, under the dynamic leadership of Cooper Holt, are highly professional, highly effective and highly respected within the halls of Congress. True, and most unfortunately your impressive legislative accomplishments of Congresses past have not been duplicated this second session of the 96th Congress. Not because your representatives have been found wanting in this area, but solely because this present anti-veteran administration has stacked the deck against you through the vast power of the White House. It has not escaped me that the Carter Administration has cut the Veterans Administration budget each and every year of its incumbency with respect to the Federal budget while our veteran population of 30 million is the highest in the history of our great republic. Where has the money denied our deserving veterans gone? Surely not to our national defense which is in shambles.

--to me it is unconscionable that veterans in need are denied hospital and medical care because of inadequate funding which has closed hospital beds and cut health-care personnel within the VA.

--to me it is a breach of faith that compensation for those with service-connected disabilities has not kept abreast of inflation and that the administration rammed through Congress a pension program admittedly designed to deny such to World War II and subsequent veterans and their survivors.

--to me it is the height of hypocrisy for the administration in high sounding words to repeatedly tell us how much we owe our Vietnam veterans and, then, only in this election year recommend a stingy 10 percent increase in the GI bill when these veterans have not had an increase since 1977 and the Congressional Budget Office has stated they now need a 30 percent increase to catch-up.

--to me the cruelest betrayal of all was the administrations proposed national health plan which, if passed, would have made the VA hospital and medical care system the nucleus of national health insurance. This, following repeated statements by the President that he supported the continued presence of an independent, progressive system of VA hospitals.

--to me it is regrettable and insensitive of the administration to drag its feet in providing open national cemeteries in which veterans can be interred near their survivors. And finally today let me personally pledge to uphold veterans preference in Federal employment and to see it is strictly enforced in all federally funded programs.

These are matters of great concern to your great organization. Let us turn now to a matter which vitally concerns our nationPEACE.

It has always struck me as odd that you who have known at firsthand the ugliness and agony of war are so often blamed for war by those who parade for peace.

The truth is exactly the reverse. Having known war, you are in the forefront of those who know that peace is not obtained or preserved by wishing and weakness. You have consistently urged maintenance of a defense capability that provides a margin of safety for America. Today, that margin is disappearing.

But because of your support for military preparedness, there are those who equate that with being militant and desirous of war. The great American humorist, Will Rogers, has an answer for those who believed that strength invited war. He said, Ive never seen anyone insult Jack Dempsey.

About 10 days ago, our new Secretary of State addressed a gathering on the West Coast. He took me to task about American military strength. Indeed, he denounced the Republican Party for pledging to restore that margin of safety which the Carter Administration had allowed to evaporate. Actually, Ive called for whatever it takes to be strong enough that no other nation will dare violate the peace. This is what we mean by superioritynothing more, nothing less. The American people expect that the nation will remain secure; they have a right to security and we have an obligation to provide it. But Mr. Muskie was downright angry. He charged that such a policy would lead to an all-out arms race. Well, I have a message for him-one which he ignored for years as a Senator when he consistently voted against a strong national defense-were already in an arms race, but only the Soviets are racing. They are outspending us in the military field by 50 percent and more than double, sometimes triple, on their strategic forces.

One wonders why the Carter Administration fails to see any threatening pattern in the Soviet presence, by way of Cuban proxies, in so much of Africa, which is the source of minerals absolutely essential to the industrialized democracies of Japan, Western Europe, and the U.S. We are self-sufficient in only 5 of the 27 minerals important to us industrially and strategically, and so the security of our resource life line is essential.

Then there is the Soviet, Cuban and East German presence in Ethiopia, South Yemen, and now the invasion and subjugation of Afghanistan. This last step moves them within striking distance of the oil-rich Arabian Gulf. And is it just coincidence that Cuban and Soviet-trained terrorists are bringing civil war to Central American countries in close proximity to the rich oil fields of Venezuela and Mexico? All over the world, we can see that in the face of declining American power, the Soviets and their friends are advancing. Yet the Carter Administration seems totally oblivious.

Clearly, world peace must be our number one priority. It is the first task of statecraft to preserve peace so that brave men need not die in battle. But it must not be peace at any price; it must not be a peace of humiliation and gradual surrender. Nor can it be the kind of peace imposed on Czechoslovakia by Soviet tanks just 12 years ago this month. And certainly it isnt the peace that came to Southeast Asia after the Paris Peace accords were signed.

Peace must be such that freedom can flourish and justice prevail. Tens of thousands of boat people have shown us there is no freedom in the so-called peace in Vietnam. The hill people of Laos know poison gas, not justice, and in Cambodia there is only the peace of the grave for at least one-third of the population slaughtered by the Communists.

For too long, we have lived with the Vietnam Syndrome. Much of that syndrome has been created by the North Vietnamese aggressors who now threaten the peaceful people of Thailand. Over and over they told us for nearly 10 years that we were the aggressors bent on imperialistic conquests. They had a plan. It was to win in the field of propaganda here in America what they could not win on the field of battle in Vietnam. As the years dragged on, we were told that peace would come if we would simply stop interfering and go home.

It is time we recognized that ours was, in truth, a noble cause. A small country newly free from colonial rule sought our help in establishing self-rule and the means of self-defense against a totalitarian neighbor bent on conquest. We dishonor the memory of 50,000 young Americans who died in that cause when we give way to feelings of guilt as if we were doing something shameful, and we have been shabby in our treatment of those who returned. They fought as well and as bravely as any Americans have ever fought in any war. They deserve our gratitude, our respect, and our continuing concern.

There is a lesson for all of us in Vietnam. If we are forced to fight, we must have the means and the determination to prevail or we will not have what it takes to secure the peace. And while we are at it, let us tell those who fought in that war that we will never again ask young men to fight and possibly die in a war our government is afraid to let them win.

Shouldnt it be obvious to even the staunchest believer in unilateral disarmament as the sure road to peace that peace never more certain than in the years following World War II when we had a margin of safety in our military power which was so unmistakable that others would not dare to challenge us?

The Korean tragedy was really not an exception to what I am saying, but a clear example of it. North Koreas attack on South Korea followed a injudicious statement from Washington that sphere of interest in the Pacific and that our defense perimeter did not include Korea. Unfortunately, Korea also became our first no win war, a portent of much that has happened since. But reflect for a moment how in those days the U.S. led free nations in other parts of the world to join together in recovering from the ravages of war. Our will and our capacity to preserve the peace were unchallenged. There was no question about our credibility and our welcome throughout the world. Our erstwhile enemies became close friends and allies, and we protected the peace from Berlin to Cuba.

When John F. Kennedy demanded the withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba and the tension mounted in 1962, it was Nikita Khrushchev who backed down, and there was no war. It was because our strategic superiority over the Soviets was so decisive, by about a margin of 8 to 1.

But, then, in the face of such evidence that the cause of peace is best served by strength not bluster, an odd thing happened. Those responsible for our defense policy ignored the fact that some evidence of aggressive intent on the part of the Soviets was surely indicated by the placement of missiles in Cuba. We failed to heed the Soviet declaration that they would make sure they never had to back down again. No one could possibly misinterpret that declaration. It was an announcement of the Soviet intention to begin a military buildup, one which continues to this day.

Our policymakers, however, decided the Soviet Union would not attempt to catch us and that, for some reason, they would permanently accept second place as their proper position. Sometime later, in 1965, Secretary of Defense McNamara stated unequivocally that the Soviets were not attempting to compete with the U.S. on strategic Forces and were resigned to inferiority.

Fifteen years have passed since that exercise in self-delusion. At that time we led the Soviet Union in about 40 strategic military categories. Today, they lead us in all but 6 or 8 and may well surpass us in those if present trends continue.

Soviet leaders talk arrogantly of a so-called correlation of forces that has moved in their favor, opening up opportunities for them to extend their influence. The response from the administration in Washington has been one of weakness, inconsistency, vacillation and bluff. A Soviet combat brigade is discovered in Cuba; the Carter Administration declares its presence 90 miles off our shore as unacceptable. The brigade is still there. Soviet troops mass on the border of Afghanistan. The President issues a stern warning against any move by those troops to cross the border. They cross the border, execute the puppet President they themselves installed in 1978, and carry out a savage attack on the people of Afghanistan. Our credibility in the world slumps further. The President proclaims well protect the Middle East by force of arms and 2 weeks later admits we dont have the force.

Is it only Jimmy Carters lack of coherent policy that is the source of our difficulty? It is his vacillation and indecision? Or is there another, more frightening possibilitythe possibility that this administration is being very consistent, that it is still guided by that same old doctrine that we have nothing to fear from the Sovietsif we just dont provoke them.

Well, World War II came about without provocation. It came because nations were weak, not strong, in the face of aggression. Those same lessons of the past surely apply today. Firmness based on a strong defense capability is not provocative. But weakness can be provocative simply because it is tempting to a nation whose imperialist ambitions are virtually unlimited.

We find ourselves increasingly in a position of dangerous isolation. Our allies are losing confidence in us, and our adversaries no longer respect us.

There is an alternative path for America which offers a more realistic hope for peace, one which takes us on the course of restoring that vital margin of safety. For thirty years since the end of World War II, our strategy has been to preserve peace through strength. It is steadiness and the vision of men like Dwight Eisenhower that we have to thank for policies that made America strong and credible.

The last Republican defense budget, proposed by President Ford, would have maintained the margin.

But the Carter Administration came to power on a promise of slashing Americas defenses. It has made good on its promise.

Our program to restore the margin of safety must be prudent and measured. We must take a stand against terrorism in the world and combat it with firmness, for it is a most cowardly and savage violation of peace. We must regain that margin of safety I spoke of both in conventional arms and the deployment of troops. And we must allow no weakness in our strategic deterrent.

We do not stand alone in the world. We have Allies who are with us, who look to America to provide leadership and to remain strong. But they are confused by the lack of a coherent, principled policy from the Carter Administration. And they must be consulted, not excluded from, matters which directly affect their own interest and security.

When we ignore our friends, when we do not lead, we weaken the unity and strength that binds our alliances. We must now reverse this dangerous trend and restore the confidence and cohesion of the alliance system on which our security ultimately rests.

There is something else. We must remember our heritage, who we are and what we are, and how this nation, this island of freedom, came into being. And we must make it unmistakably plain to all the world that we have no intention of compromising our principles, our beliefs or our freedom. Our reward will be world peace; there is no other way to have it.

For more than a decade, we have sought a dente. The world means relaxation. We dont talk about a detente with our allies; there is no tension there that needs relaxing. We seek to relax tensions where there are tensionswith potential enemies. And if those potential enemies are well armed and have shown a willingness to use armed force to gain their ends (for ends that are different from ours) then relaxing tensions is a delicate and dangerous but necessary business.

Dente has meaning only if both sides take positive actions to relax the tension. When one side relaxes while the other carries out the greatest military buildup in the history of mankind, the cause of peace has not been advanced.

Arms control negotiation can often help to improve stability but not when the negotiations are one-sided. And they obviously have been one-sided and will continue to be so if we lack steadiness and determination in keeping up our defense.

I think continued negotiation with the Soviet Union is essential. We need never be afraid to negotiate as long as we remain true to our goalsthe preservation of peace and freedomand dont seek agreement just for the sake of having an agreement. It is important, also, that the Soviets know we are going about the business of restoring our margin of safety pending an agreement by both sides to limit various kinds of weapons.

I have repeatedly stated that I would be willing to negotiate an honest, verifiable reduction in nuclear weapons by both our countries to the point that neither of us represented a threat to the other. I cannot, however, agree to any treaty, including the SALT II treaty, which, in effect, legitimizes the continuation of a one-sided nuclear arms buildup.

We have an example in recent history of our ability to negotiate properly by keeping our objective clearly in mind until an agreement is reached. Back in the mid 50s, at the very height of the cold war, Allied and Soviet military forces were still occupying Austria in a situation that was virtually a confrontation. We negotiated the Austrian State Treaty calling for the removal of all the occupying forces, Allied and Soviet. If we had negotiated in the manner weve seen these last few years, Austria would still be a divided country.

The American people must be given a better understanding of the challenge to our security and of the need for effort and, yes, sacrifice to turn the situation around.

Our government must stop pretending that it has a choice between promoting the general welfare and providing for the common defense. Today they are one and the same.

Let our people be aware of the several objectives of Soviet strategy in this decade and the threat they represent to continued world peace. An attempt will be made to divide the NATO alliance and to separate, one at a time, our Allies and friends from the United States. Those efforts are clearly underway. Another objective Ive already mentioned is an expansion of Soviet influence in the area of the Arabian Gulf and South Asia. Not much attention has been given to another move, and that is the attempt to encircle and neutralize the Peoples Republic of China. Much closer to home is Soviet-inspired trouble in the Caribbean. Subversion and Cuban-trained guerilla bands are targeted on Jamaica, Honduras, El Salvador, and Guatemala. Leftist regimes have already taken over in Nicaragua and Grenada.

A central concern of the Kremlin will always be the Soviet ability to handle a direct confrontation with our military forces. In a recent address, Paul Nitze said; The Kremlin leaders do not want war; they want the world. For that reason, they have put much of their military effort into strategic nuclear programs. Here the balance has been moving against us and will continue to do so if we follow the course set by this administration.

The Soviets want peace and victory. We must understand this and what it means to us. They seek a superiority in military strength that, in the event of a confrontation, would leave us with an unacceptable choice between submission or conflict. Submission would give us peace alrightthe peace of a Czechoslovakia or and Afghanistan. But if we have the will and the determination to restore the margin of safety which this Administration seems bent on losing, we can have real peace because we will never be faced with an ultimatum from anyone.

Indeed, the men in the Kremlin could in the face of such determination decide that true arms limitation makes sense.

Our best hope of persuading them to live in peace is to convince them they cannot win at war.

For a nation such as ours, arms are important only to prevent others from conquering us or our allies. We are not a belligerent people. Our purpose is not to prepare for war or wish harm to others. When we had great strength in the years following World War II, we used that strength not for territorial gain but to defend others.

Our foreign policy should be to show by example the greatness of our system and the strength of American ideals. The truth is we would like nothing better than to see the Russian people living in freedom and dignity instead of being trapped in a backwash of history as they are. The greatest fallacy of the Lenin-Marxist philosophy is that it is the wave of the future. Everything about it is primitive: compulsion in place of free initiative; coercion in place of law; militarism in place of trade; and empire-building in place of self-determination; and luxury for a chosen few at the expense of the many. We have seen nothing like it since the Age of Feudalism.

When people have had a free choice, where have they chosen Communism? What other system in the world has to build walls to keep its people in?

Recently academician Andrei Sakharov, one of Russias great scientists and presently under house arrest, smuggled a statement out of the Soviet Union. It turned up in the New York Times Magazine of June 8, where Sakharov wrote: I consider the United States the historically determined leader of the movement toward a pluralist and free society, vital to mankind.

He is right. We have strayed off course many times and we have been careless with machinery of freedom bequeathed to us by the Founding Fathers, but, somehow, it has managed to survive our frailties. One of those Founding Fathers spoke the truth when he said God intended America to be free.

We have been a refuge for the persecuted and down-trodden from every corner of the world for 200 years. Today some of us are concerned by the latest influx of refugees, that boat people from Southeast Asia and from Cubaall fleeing from the inhumanity of Communism. We worry about our capacity to care for them. I believe we must take a concerted effort to help them, and that others in the world should share in the responsibility.

But lets do a better job of exporting Americanism. Lets meet our responsibility to keep the peace at the same time we maintain without compromise our principles and ideals. Lets help the world eliminate the conditions which cause citizens to become refugees.

I believe it is our pre-ordained destiny to show all mankind that they, too, can be free without having to leave their native shore.

#
#Labor Day Speech at Liberty State Park, Jersey City, New Jersey
#

It is fitting that on Labor Day, we meet beside the waters of New York harbor, with the eyes of Miss Liberty on our gathering and in the words of the poet whose lines are inscribed at her feet, The air bridged harbor that twin cities frame.

Through this Golden Door, under the gaze of that Mother of Exiles, have come millions of men and women, who first stepped foot on American soil right there, on Ellis Island, so close to the Statue of Liberty.

These families came here to work. They came to build. Others came to America in different ways, from other lands, under different, often harrowing conditions, but this place symbolizes what they all managed to build, no matter where they came from or how they came or how much they suffered.

They helped to build that magnificent city across the river. They spread across the land building other cities and towns and incredibly productive farms.

They came to make America work. They didnt ask what this country could do for them but what they could do to make this refuge the greatest home of freedom in history.

They brought with them courage, ambition and the values of family, neighborhood, work, peace and freedom. They came from different lands but they shared the same values, the same dream.

Today a President of the United States would have us believe that dream is over or at least in need of change.

Jimmy Carters Administration tells us that the descendants of those who sacrificed to start again in this land of freedom may have to abandon the dream that drew their ancestors to a new life in a new land.

The Carter record is a litany of despair, of broken promises, of sacred trusts abandoned and forgotten.

Eight million out of work. Inflation running at 18 percent in the first quarter of 1980. Black unemployment at about 14 percent, higher than any single year since the government began keeping separate statistics. Four straight major deficits run up by Carter and his friends in Congress. The highest interest rates since the Civil War--reaching at times close to 20 percent--lately down to more than 11 percent but now going up again--productivity falling for six straight quarters among the most productive people in history.

Through his inflation he has raised taxes on the American people by 30 percent--while their real income has risen only 20 percent. He promised he would not increase taxes for the low and middle-income people--the workers of America. Then he imposed on American families the largest single tax increase in history.

His answer to all of this misery? He tries to tell us that we are only in a recession, not a depression, as if definitionswords--relieve our suffering.

Let it show on the record that when the American people cried out for economic help, Jimmy Carter took refuge behind a dictionary. Well if its a definition he wants, Ill give him one. A recession is when your neighbor loses his job. A depression is when you lose yours. Recovery is when Jimmy Carter loses his.

I have talked with unemployed workers all across this country. I have heard their views on what Jimmy Carter has done to them and their families.

They arent interested in semantic quibbles. They are out of work and they know who put them out of work. And they know the difference between a recession and a depression.

Let Mr. Carter go to their homes, look their children in the eye and argue with them that in is only a recession that put dad or mom out of work.

Let him go to the unemployment lines and lecture those workers who have been betrayed on what is the proper definition for their widespread economic misery.

Human tragedy, human misery, the crushing of the human spirit. They do not need defining--they need action.

And it is action, in the form of jobs, lower taxes, and an expanded economy that -- as President -- I intend to provide.

Call this human tragedy whatever you want. Whatever it is, it is Jimmy Carters. He caused it. He tolerates it. And he is going to answer to the American people for it.

Last week, more than three years after be became President, he finally came up with what he calls a new economic program. It is his 5th new economic program in 3 years. He talks as if someone else has been in charge these past few years. With two months to go until the election he rides to the rescue now with a crazy-quilt of obvious election-year promises which hell ask Congress for--next year. After three years of neglect, the misery of unemployment, inflation, high taxes, dwindling earning power and inability to save--after all this, American workers have now been discovered by this administration.

Well it wont work. It is cynical. It is political. And it is too late. The damage is done and every American family knows who did it.

In 1976 he said he would never use unemployment as an economic tool to fight inflation. In 1980 he called for an increase in unemployment--to fight inflation.

In 1976 he said he would bring unemployment and inflation down to 3 percent.

Who can believe him? Unemployment is now around 8 percent, inflation is 12 .

And most of us have begun to realize that so long as Carter policies are in effect, the next four years will be as dark as the last four.

But here, beside the torch that many times before in our nations history has cast a golden light in times of gloom, I pledge to you Ill bring a new message of hope to all America.

I look forward to meeting Mr. Carter in debate, confronting him with the whole sorry record of his Administration--the record he prefers not to mention. If he ever finally agrees to the kind of first debate the American people want--which Im beginning to doubt--hell answer to them and to me.

This country needs a new administration, with a renewed dedication to the dream of America--an administration that will give that dream new life and make America great again!

Restoring and revitalizing that dream will take bold action.

On this day, dedicated to American working men and women, may I tell you the vision I have of a new administration and of a new Congress, filled with new members dedicated to the values we honor today?

Beginning in January of 1981, American workers will once again be heeded. Their needs and values will be acted upon in Washington. I will consult with representatives of organized labor on those matters concerning the welfare of the working people of this nation.

I happen to be the only president of a union ever to be a candidate for President of the United States.

As president of my union -- the Screen Actors Guild -- I spent many hours with the late George Meany, whose love of this country and whose belief in a strong defense against all totalitarians is one of labors greatest legacies. One year ago today on Labor Day George Meany told the American people:

As American workers and their families return from their summer vacations they face growing unemployment and inflation, a climate of economic anxiety and uncertainty.

Well I pledge to you in his memory that the voice of the American worker will once again be heeded in Washington and that the climate of fear that he spoke of will no longer threaten workers and their families.

When we talk about tax reduction, when we talk about ending inflation by stopping it where it starts -- in Washington -- we are talking about a way to bring labor and management together for America. We are talking about jobs, and productivity and wages. We are talking about doing away with Jimmy Carters view of a no-growth policy, and ever-shrinking economic pie with smaller pieces for each of us.

Thats no answer. We can have a bigger pie with bigger slices for everyone. I believe that together you and I can bake that bigger pie. We can make that dream that brought so many of us or our parents and grandparents to this land live once more.

Let us work to protect the human right to acquire and own a home, and make sure that that right is extended to as many Americans as possible. A home is part of that dream.

I want to work in Washington to roll back the crushing burden of taxation that limits investment, production, and the generation of real wealth for our people. A job, and savings, and hope for our children is part of that dream.

I want to help Americans of every race, creed and heritage keep and build that sense of community which is at the heart of America, for a decent neighborhood is part of that dream.

We will work to strengthen the small business sector which creates most of the new jobs we need for our people. Small business needs relief from government paperwork, relief from over-regulation, relief from a host of governmentally-created problems that defeat the effort of creative men and women. A chance to invest, build and produce new wealth is part of the dream.

But restoring the American dream requires more than restoring a sound, productive economy, vitally important as that is. It requires a return to spiritual and moral values, values so deeply held by those who came here to build a new life. We need to restore those values in our daily life, in our neighborhoods and in our governments dealings with the other nations of the world.

These are the values inspiring those brave workers in Poland. The values that have inspired other dissidents under Communist domination. They remind us that where free unions and collective bargaining are forbidden, freedom is lost. They remind us that freedom is never more than one generation away from extinction. You and I must protect and preserve freedom here or it will not be passed on to our children. Today the workers in Poland are showing a new generation not how high is the price of freedom but how much it is worth that price.

I want more than anything Ive ever wanted, to have an administration that will, through its actions, at home and in the international arena, let millions of people know that Miss Liberty still Lifts her lamp beside the golden door. Through our international broadcasting stations -- the Voice of America, Radio Free Europe, and the others -- let us send, loud and clear, the message that this generation of Americans intends to keep that lamp shining; that this dream, this last best hope of man on earth, this nation under God, shall not perish from the earth. We will instead carry on the building of an American economy that once again holds forth real opportunity for all, we shall continue to be a symbol of freedom and guardian of the eternal values that so inspired those who came to this port of entry.

Let us pledge to each other, with this Great Lady looking on, that we can, and so help us God, we will make America great again.

#
#PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN DEBATE
#

MR. MOYERS: None of the questions has been submitted in advance either to the League of Women Voters, or to the candidates, or to their representatives.


Gentlemen, thank you both coming. The ground rules you agreed upon with the League are brief: Each panelist will ask a single question. You will have two and a half minutes in which to respond. After you have stated your position in those two and a half minutes, each of you will have one minute and 15 seconds for response. At the close of the debate, each of you will have three minutes for closing remarks.


We ask the Convention Center audience to abide by one simple ground rule: Please do not applaud or express approval or disapproval during the debate. You may do that on November 4th.


Having won the toss of the coin, Mr. Anderson will respond to the first question from Carol Loomis.


MS. LOOMIS: Mr. Anderson, opinion polls show that the American public sees inflation as the countrys number one economic problem. Yet as individuals they oppose cures that hurt them personally. Elected officials have played along by promising to cure inflation, while backing away from tough programs that might hurt one special interest group or another, and by actually adding inflationary elements to the system, such as indexing. They have gone for what is politically popular rather than for what might work and amount to leadership.


My question -- and please be specific -- is: What politically unpopular measures are you willing to endorse, push, and stay with that might provide real progress in reducing inflation?


CONGRESSMAN ANDERSON: Well, Ms. Loomis, I think its very appropriate that the first question in this first debate of campaign 80 should relate to the economy of the country, because it seems to me that the people who are watching us tonight, 221 million Americans, are truly concerned about the poor rate of performance of the American economy over the last four years.


Now, Governor Reagan is not responsible for what has happened over the last four years, nor am I. The man who should be here tonight to respond to those charges chose not to attend.


But I want to answer as specifically as I can the question that you have just put to me. Let me tell you that I, first of all, oppose an election year tax cut, whether it is the ten percent across the board tax cut promised to the taxpayers by my opponent in this debate tonight, or whether it is the $27.5 billion tax cut promised on the 20th of August by President Carter.


I simply think that when we are confronting a budget deficit this year - - and this fiscal year will end in about ten days, and we are confronted with the possibility of a deficit of $60 billion, perhaps as much as $63 billion that that simply would be irresponsible; that once again the printing presses will start to roll; once again we will see the monetization of that debt result in a higher rate of inflation.


Even though weve seen some hopeful signs, perhaps, in the flash report on the third quarter, that perhaps the economy is coming out of the recession, weve also seen the rise in the rate of the prime; we have seen mortgage rates go back up again, a sure sign of inflation in the housing industry.


What I would propose -- and I proposed it way back in March, when I was a candidate in my own state of Illinois I proposed $11.3 billion specifically in cuts in the federal budget. I think weve got to have fiscal restraint. And I said at that time that one of the things that we could do that perhaps would save as much as 5 to $7 billion according to one of the leading members of the House Budget Committee, was to recalculate the index that is used to determine the cost of living benefits that are paid to civil service retirees, to military retirees; that we ought to, in addition to that, we ought to pay those retirement benefits on the basis of once a year instead of twice a year, and save $750 billion. In other words, fiscal restraint


MR. MOYERS: Mr. Anderson, your time is up.


CONGRESSMAN ANDERSON: -- I think is necessary.


MR. MOYERS: Ms. Loomis.


MS. LOOMIS: Governor Reagan, repeating the question, and I would ask you again to engage in as many specifics as you can. What politically unpopular measures are you willing to endorse, push, and stay with that might provide real progress in reducing inflation?


GOVERNOR REAGAN: I believe that the only unpopular measures actually that could be would be applied would be unpopular with government, and with those, perhaps, some special interest groups who are tied closely to government. I believe that inflation today is caused by government simply spending more than government takes in, at the same time that government has imposed on business and industry, from the shopkeeper on the corner to the biggest industrial plant in America, countless harassing regulations and punitive taxes that have reduced productivity, at the same time they have increased the cost of production.


And when you are reducing productivity at the same time that you are turning out printing press money in excessive amounts, youre causing inflation. And it isnt really higher prices; its just you are reducing the value of the money. You are robbing the American people of their savings.


And so the plan that I have proposed -- and contrary to what John says, my plan is for a phased-in tax cut over a three-year period -- tax increase in depreciation allowances for business and industry, to give them the capital to refurbish plants and equipment, research and development, improved technology -- all of which we see our foreign competitors having and we have the greatest percentage of outmoded industrial plant and equipment of any of the industrial nations produce more and have stable money supply and give the people of this country a greater share of their own savings.


Now, I know that this has been called inflationary by my opponent and by the man who isnt here tonight. But I dont see where it is inflationary to have people keep more of their earnings and spend it and it isnt inflationary for government to take that money away from them and spend it on the things it wants to spend it on.


I believe we need incentives for the individual and for business and industry, and I believe the plan that I have submitted, with detailed backing and which has been approved by a number of our leading economists in the country, is based on projections, conservative projections out for the next five years, that indicate that this plan would by 1983 result in a balanced budget.


We have to remember when we talk a tax cut, were only talking about reducing a tax increase, because this Administration has left us with a built-in tax increase that will amount to $86 billion next year --


MR. MOYERS: Your time is up.


GOVERNOR REAGAN: -- and $500 billion over the next five.


MR. MOYERS: Mr. Anderson.


CONGRESSMAN ANDERSON: Mr. Moyers, in addition to saying that this no time for a tax cut in view of the incipient signs of renewed inflation, in addition to calling for restraint in federal spending, fifteen months ago I also suggested we ought to have an emergency excise tax on gasoline. I say that because I think this year we will send $90 billion out of this country to pay for imported oil, even though those imports have been reduced. And since I first made that proposal fifteen months ago, the price of gasoline, which was then 80 cents, has gone up to $1.30.


In other words, we have had a huge increase of about 50 cents a gallon since that time, and all of that increase has gone out of this country, or much of it, into the pockets of OPEC oil producers, whereas I had proposed we ought to take put that tax on here at home, reduce that consumption of that imported oil, recycle those proceeds then back into the pockets of the American workers by reducing their tax payments, their Social Security tax payments, by 50 percent. That, I think, in addition would be an anti-inflationary measure that would strengthen the economy of this country.


MR. MOYERS: Mr. Reagan.


GOVERNOR REAGAN: Well, I cannot see where a 50 cent a gallon tax applied to gasoline would have changed the price of gasoline. It would still have gone up as much as it has, and the 50 cents would be added on top of that, and it would be a tax paid by the consumers, and then we are asked to believe that some way they would get this back to the consumers.


But why? Why take it in the first place if you are going to give it back? Why not leave it with them?


And while John spoke about fifteen years ago and the position that he or fifteen months ago and what he believed in, fifteen months ago he was a co-signer and advocating the very tax cut that I am proposing and said that that would be a forward step in fighting inflation, and that it would be beneficial to the working people of this country.


MR. MOYERS: The next question goes to Mr. Reagan from Daniel Greenberg.


MR. GREENBERG: Well, gentlemen, what I would like to say first is I think the panel and the audience would appreciate responsiveness to the questions rather than repetitions of your campaign addresses.


Now, my question for the Governor is every serious examination of the future supply of energy and other essential resources, including air, land and water, find that we face shortages and skyrocketing prices, and that in many ways we are pushing the environment to dangerous limits.


I would like to know specifically what changes you would encourage and require in American lifestyles, in automobile use, housing, land use and general consumption to meet problems that arent going to respond to campaign lullabies about minor conservation efforts and more production.


GOVERNOR REAGAN: Well, I believe that conservation, of course, is worthy in and of itself. Anything that would preserve to help us use less energy, that would be fine and I am for it. But I do not believe that conservation alone is the answer to the present energy problem because all you are doing then is staving off by a short time the day when you would come to the end of the energy supply.


To say that we are limited and in a dangerous point in this country with regard to energy I think is to ignore the fact. The fact is that in todays oil wells, there is more oil still there than we have so far taken out and used. But it would require what is known as secondary or tertiary efforts to bring it out of the ground. And this is known oil reserves, known supplies.


There are hundreds of millions of acres of land that have been taken out of circulation by the government, for whatever reason they have, that is believed by the most knowledgeable oil geologists to contain probably more oil and natural gas than we have used so far since we drilled that first well 121 years ago.


We have a coal supply that is equal to 50 percent of the worlds coal supply, good for centuries in this country.


I grant you that prices may go up because as you go further and have to go deeper, you are adding to the cost of production. We have nuclear power which, I believe, with the most stringent of safety requirements, could meet our energy needs for the next couple of decades while we go forward exploring the areas of solar power and other forms of energy that might be renewable and that would not be exhaustible.


All of these things can be done. When you stop and think that we are only drilling on 2 percent, at least only 2 percent of the possibility for oil of the whole continental shelf around the United States, when you stop to think that the government has taken over 100 million acres of land out of circulation in Alaska alone that is believed by geologist to contain much in the line of minerals and energy sources, then I think it is the government, and the government with its own restrictions and regulations, that is creating the energy crisis, that we are indeed an energy rich nation.


MR. MOYERS: I would like to say at this point that the candidates requested the same questions to be repeated for the sake of precision on the part of the interrogator.


So, Mr. Greenberg, you may address Mr. Anderson.


MR. GREENBERG: Mr. Anderson, I would like to know specifically what changes you would encourage and require in American lifestyles, in automobile use, housing, land us and consumption to meet problems that arent going to respond to campaign lullabies about minor conservation efforts and more production.


CONGRESSMAN ANDERSON: Well, Mr. Greenberg, I simply cannot allow to go unpassed the statements that have just been made by Mr. Reagan, who once again has demonstrated, I think, a total misunderstanding of the energy crisis that confronts not only this country but the world when he suggests that we have 27 years supply of natural gas, 47 years supply of oil and all the rest, and that we really, all we have to do is to get the government off the back of the oil industry and that is going to be enough.


I agree with what I think is the major premise of your question, sir, that we are going to have to create a new conservation effort in the minds of the American people, and that is simply why I proposed fifteen months ago the emergency excise tax on gasoline that I did. I did it as a security measure to be sure, because I would rather see us reduce the consumption of imported oil than have to send American boys to fight in the Persian Gulf.


But at the same time, I think it is going to take a dramatic measure of that kind to convince the American people that we will have to reduce the use of the private automobile. We simply cannot have people sitting one behind the wheel of a car in these long traffic jams going in and out of our great cities. We are going to have to resort to vanpooling, to car-pooling. We are going to have to develop better community transportation systems so that with buses and light rail, we can replace the private automobile in those places where it clearly is not energy efficient.


I think that with respect to housing, when we are consuming, even though our per capita income today is about the same as that of the Federal Republic of Germany, we are consuming about, by a factor of two, the amount of energy that they consume in that country.


Surely there are things that we can do in the retrofitting, in the redesign of our homes, not only of our houses but of our commercial structures as well, that will make it possible for us to achieve. According to one study that was published a short time ago, the Harvard Business School Study indicated that just in the commercial sector alone of the economy, we could save between 30 to 40 percent of the energy that we consume in this county today.


So I think yes, we will have to change in a very appreciable way some of the lifestyles that we now enjoy.


MR. MOYERS: Mr. Reagan.


GOVERNOR REAGAN: Well, as I have said, I am not an enemy of conservation. I wouldnt be called a conservative if I were. But when my figures are challenged, as the President himself challenged them after I made them, I think it should be called to the attention of John and the others here that my figures are the figures of the Department of Energy, which has not been overly optimistic in recent years as to how much supply we have left. That is the same government that in 1920 told us we only have enough oil left for 13 years, and 19 years later told us we only had enough left for another 15 years.


As for saving energy and conserving, the American people havent been doing badly at that because in industry today we are producing more over the last several years, and at 12 percent less use of energy than we were back in about 1973, and motorists are using 8 percent less than they were back at that time of the oil embargo.


So I think we are proving that we can go forward with conservation and benefit from that. But also, I think it is safe to say that we do have sources of energy that have not yet been used or found.


MR. MOYERS: Mr. Anderson.


CONGRESSMAN ANDERSON: Mr. Greenberg, I think my opponent in this debate tonight is overlooking one other very important fact, and that is that we cannot look at this as simply a national problem, even though it is true that perhaps between now and the end of the decade our total consumption of oil may not increase by more than perhaps a million or two barrels of oil a day. The rest of the western world, we are told, may see its consumption increase from 51 million barrels to about 66 million. And that additional 15 million barrels is going to cause scarcity. It is going to cause scarcity in world markets, because there are at least five reputable studies, one even by the American Petroleum Institute itself, that I think clearly indicates that somewhere along around the end of the present decade, total world demand for oil is simply going to exceed total available supply.


I think that conservation, I think that a change in lifestyle is necessary, and we had better begin to plan for that now rather than later.


MR. MOYERS: This question goes to you, Mr. Anderson, from Charles Corddry.


MR. CORDDRY: Mr. Anderson, you and Mr. Reagan both speak for better defense, for stronger defense and for programs that would mean spending more money. You do not either of you however, come to grips with the fundamental problems of manning the forces, of who shall serve and how the burden will be distributed. This will surely be a critical issue in the next presidential term.


You both oppose the draft. The questions are: How would you fill the understrength combat force with numbers and quality, without reviving conscription; and will you commit yourself here tonight, should you become Commander-in-Chief, to propose a draft, however unpopular, if it became clear that voluntary means are not working?


MR. ANDERSON: Mr. Corddry, I am well aware of the present deficiencies of the armed forces of this country. When you have a report, as we did recently, that six out of ten CONUS divisions in this country, continental United States Army divisions simply could not pass a readiness test; that two out of three divisions that were to be allocated to the so-called rapid deployment force could not meet a readiness test, and in most cases, that failure to meet the test was because of a lack of manning requirements and inability to fill many of the slots in those divisions.


Yes, I have seen figures that indicate that perhaps as of September 1980, this very money, that there is a shortage of about 104,000 in the ranks between E-4 and E-9. And there were reports, public reports not long ago, about ships that could not leave American ports because of a lack of crews.


I talked to one of the leading former Chiefs of Naval Operations in my office a few weeks ago, who told me about 25,000 chief petty officers being short.


But I think that that is clearly related to the fact that, going back to the time when the all volunteer army was created in 1973 and I worked hard for it and supported it - - we simply have failed to keep pace with the cost of living. And today on average, the average serviceman is at least 15 percent - - and I happen to think thats a very modest estimate - - 15 percent below what has happened to the cost of living over that period of time. And as a result the families of some of our young servicemen are on food stamps. I think thats shocking, its shameful.


So, yes, I told the American Legion National Convention, the VFW National Convention, when I spoke to each of those bodies, I outlined a very specific program of increasing pay and allowances, reenlistment bonuses. That only makes sense.


But I would leave you with this thought, sir, to be quite specific in my answer to your question: that of course, to protect the vital interests of this country, if that became impossible, If I could not, despite the very best efforts that I ask the Congress to put forward to raise those pay and incentives and allowances, of course I would not leave this country go undefended.


MR. MOYERS: Mr. Corddry?


MR. CORDDRY: Mr. Reagan, I will just repeat the two questions: How would you fill the under-strength combat forces, with numbers and with quality, without reviving conscription, and will you commit yourself here tonight, should you become the commander in chief, to propose a draft, however unpopular, if it becomes clear that voluntary means are not solving our manpower problems?


GOVERNOR REAGAN: Mr. Corddry, its a shame now that there are only two of us here debating, because the two that are here are in more agreement than disagreement on this particular issue, and the only one who would be disagreeing with us is the President, if he were present.


I too believe in the voluntary military. As a matter of fact, today the shortages of noncommissioned officers that John mentioned are such that if we tried to have a draft today, we wouldnt have the noncommissioned officers to train the draftees.


Now, I believe the answer lies in just recognizing human nature and how we make everything else work in this country when we want it to work. Recognize that we have a voluntary military. We are asking for men and women to join the military as a career, and were asking them to deal with the most sophisticated equipment. And a young man is out there on a billion dollar carrier in charge of the maintenance of a $25 million aircraft, working 100 hours a week at times, and hes earning less for himself and his family while hes away from his family that he could earn if he was in one of the most menial jobs working 40 hours a week here at home.


As an aid to enlistment - - we had an aid. 46 percent of the people who enlisted in the voluntary military up until 1977 said they did so for one particular reason: The GI Bill of Rights, the fact that by serving in the military they could provide for a future college education. In 1977 we took that away from the military. That meant immediately 46 percent of your people that were signing up had no reason for signing up.


So I think it is a case of pay scale, of recognizing that if were going to have young men and women responsible for our security, dealing with this sophisticated equipment, then for heavens sakes lets go out and have a pay scale that is commensurate with the sacrifice that were asking of them.


Along with this, I think that we need something else that has been allowed to deteriorate. We need a million-man active reserve that could be called up in an instants notice, and it would also be trained, ready to use that type of equipment. Both of these I think would respond to the proper kind of incentives that we could offer these people.


The other day I just - - Ill hasten - - I just saw once example. Down in Texas I just saw a high school that is military.


MR. MOYERS: Your time is up, Mr. Reagan. Im sorry.


GOVERNOR REAGAN: Ill catch up with that later.


MR. MOYERS: You can finish that after its over. Mr. Anderson.


CONGRESSMAN ANDERSON: Mr. Moyers, I must say that I think I have a better opportunity, however, of finding the necessary funds to pay what admittedly will be a very, very substantial sums of money. We signed on bill, or we passed one bill just a couple of weeks ago in the House of Representatives, for $500 million, a half billion dollars. That is just a down payment, in my opinion.


But unlike Governor Reagan, I do not support a boondoggle like the MX Missile. Ive just gotten a report from the Air Force that indicates that the 30-year life cycle cost of that system is going to be $100 billion. The initial cost if about $54 billion, and then when you add in the additional cost, not only the construction of the system, the missiles and the personnel and so on, when you add in the additional cost over the life cycle of that system, over $100 billion.


I would propose to save the taxpayers of this country from that kind of costly boondoggle.


MR. MOYERS: Mr. Reagan?


GOVERNOR REAGAN: Well, let me just say that, with regard to that same missile system, I happen to support and believe in the missile itself. But thats not the $54 billion cost that John is talking about. Hes talking about that fantastic plan of the Administration to take thousands and thousands of square miles out in the Western states. And first he was going to dig a race track and have it going around in a race track, so it would meet the requirements of the SALT II treaty, and now hes decided hell have a straight up and down things, so it can be both verifiable and yet hide able from the Soviet Union.


We need the missile, I think, because we are so out of balance strategically that we lack a deterrent to a possible first assault. But I am not in favor of the plan that is so costly. And therefore, if I only had another second left, Id say that that high school class in military training - - 40 of its 80 graduates last year entered the United States service academies, West Point, Annapolis, and the Air Force Academy. And to see those young men made me very proud to realize that there are young people in this country who are prepared to go into that kind of a career in service of their country.


MR. MOYERS: This question comes to you, Mr. Reagan, from my colleague, Lee May.


MR. MAY: Mr. Reagan, the military is not the only area of crisis. American cities are physically wearing out, as housing, streets, sewers and budgets all fall apart. And all of this is piled upon the emotional strain that comes from refugees and racial confrontations.


Now, Im wondering, what specific plans do you have for federal involvement in saving our cities from this physical and emotional crisis? And how would you carry out those plans, in addition to raising military pay, without going against your pledge of fiscal restraint?


GOVERNOR REAGAN: I dont think Id have to go against that pledge. I think one of the problems today with the cities is federal aid. The majors that Ive talked to in some of our leading cities tell me that the federal grants that come for specific cause or specific objective come with such red tape, such priorities established by a bureaucracy in Washington, that the local governments hands are tied with regard to using that money as they feel it could best be used and for what they think might be the top priority.


If they had that money without those government restrictions, every one of them has told me they could make great savings and make far greater use of the money.


What I have been advocating is, why dont we start with the Federal Government turning back tax sources to states and local governments, as well as the responsibilities for those programs? 75 percent of the people live in the cities. I dont know of a city in America that doesnt have the kind of problems youre taking about.


But where are we getting the money that the Federal Government is putting out to help them? New York is being taxed for money that will then go to Detroit. But Detroit is being taxed for money that, lets say, will then go to Chicago, while Chicago is being taxed to help with the problems in Philadelphia. Wouldnt it make a lot more sense if the government let them keep their own money there in the first place?


But there are other things that we can do with inner cities. And I believe - - I have talked of having zones in those cities that are run down, where theres a high percentage of people on welfare, and offer tax incentives. The government isnt getting the tax now from businesses there because they arent there, or from individuals who are on welfare rather than working. And why dont we offer incentives for business and industry to start up in those zones? Give them a tax moratorium for a period if they build and develop there.


The individuals that would then get jobs, give them a break that encourages them to leave the social welfare programs and go to work. We could have an urban homestead act. Weve got thousands and thousands of homes owned by government, boarded up, being vandalized, that have been taken in in mortgage foreclosures. What if we had a homestead act and said to the people: For one dollar, we sell you this house. All you have to do is agree to refurbish it, make it habitable, and live in it. Just as 100 or more years ago we did with the open land in this country, urban - - or country homesteading.


MR. MOYERS: Mr. May.


MR. MAY: Mr. Anderson, let me ask you: What specific plans do you have for federal involvement in saving cities from the physical and emotional crises that confront them, and how would you carry out those plans, in addition to raising military pay, without going against your pledge of fiscal restraint?


CONGRESSMAN ANDERSON: Mr. May, I recently saw a Princeton University study that indicated that the cities of America, the large cities of this country, are in worse shape today than they were in 1960. It seems to totally belie the claim that I heard President Carter make a few days ago that he was the first President that had come forth with a real urban strategy to meet the problems of urban America.


Incidentally, just this last week the crown jewel in that program that he had devised was stolen, I guess, because the conference Committee turned down the ambitious plan that he had to increase the amount of money that would be available for the Economic Development Administration for loan guarantees and direct loans and credits.


Im happy to say that, in contrast to that, the Anderson-Lucy platform for American program for the 80s has devoted considerable time and in very specific detail we have talked about two things that ought to be done to aid urban America:


We call, first of all, for the creation of a $4 billion Urban Reinvestment Trust Fund, to do exactly what you spoke about in your question: to rebuild the streets, to rebuild the cities, the leaking water mains.


I was in North Pittsburgh, I think it was, a few weeks ago on my campaign. The water mains in that city had began to leak, and literally there wasnt money available to fix them. And until we can begin to recreate the basic infrastructure of the great cities of America, particularly in the upper Midwest and in the Northeast, they simply are not going to provide the kind of economic climate that will enable them to retain industry, enable them to retain the kind of solid industrial base that they need so that they can provide jobs.


We have also provided in our program for a $4 billion community trust fund, and weve told you where the money is coming from. Its going to come from the dedications by 1984 of the excise revenues that today are being collected by the Federal Government on alcohol and tobacco. That money I think ought to be put into rebuilding the base of our cities.


In addition to that, jobs programs to re-employ the youth in our cities would be very high on my priority list: both the Youth Opportunities Act of 1980 and a billion dollar program that I would recommend to put youth to work in energy projects, in conservation projects, in projects that would carry out some of the great national goals of our country.


MR. MOYERS: Mr. Reagan, your response?


GOVERNOR REAGAN: John claims that he is making clear where the money will come from. It will come from the pockets of the people. It will come from the pockets of the people who are living in those very areas. And the problem is, with governments federal, state and local taking 44 cents out of every dollar earned, that the Federal Government has preempted too many of the tax sources, and that the cities - - that if Pittsburgh does not have the money to fix the leaking water mains, its because the Federal Government has preempted it.


Now the Federal Government is going to turn around and say: Oh, you have this problem. We will now hand you the money to do it. But the Federal Government doesnt make money. It just takes it from the people. And in my view this is not the answer to the problem.


Stand in the South Bronx, as I did, in the spot where Jimmy Carter made his promise that he was going to, with multi-billion dollar programs, refurbish that area that looks like bombed-out London in World War Two. I stood there and I met the people and I heard them ask just for something that would give them hope. And I believe that, with all of the promises that have been broken - - theyve never been carried out. But I believe that my plan might offer an opportunity for that, if we would move into those areas and lets encourage with the tax incentives the private sector to develop and to create the jobs for the people.


MR. MOYERS: Mr. Anderson?


CONGRESSMAN ANDERSON: Well, of course, where has the private sector been, Governor Reagan, during the years that our cities have been deteriorating?


It seems to me that to deny the responsibility of the Federal Government to do something about our crumbling cities is to deny the opportunity, for one thing, to 55 percent of the black population of our country that is locked within the inner cities of the metropolitan areas of our country. We simply cannot ignore the fact that in those cities today we have 55 percent youth unemployment amongst black and Hispanic youths. And why is that? Its because they have lost their industry.


And why have they lost their industry? Its because they no longer present the kind of viable economic climate that makes it possible for industry to remain there or to locate there. I think government has a responsibility to find jobs for the youth of this country, and that the place to start is to assist in the very important and necessary task of helping cities rebuild.


MR. MOYERS: Jane Bryant Quinn has the next question for you, Mr. Anderson.


MS. QUINN: Mr. Anderson, many voters are very worried that tax cuts, nice as they are, will actually add to inflation. Many eminent conservatives have testified that even business tax cuts, as you have proposed, can be inflationary as long as we have a budget deficit.


Now, Mr. Reagan has mentioned that he put out a five year economic forecast, which indeed he did, but it contained no inflation number. You have published a detailed program, but it, too, doesnt have any hard numbers on it about how these things work with inflation.


So I would like to ask you if you will commit to publish specific forecasts within two weeks so that the voters can absorb them and understand them and analyze them, showing exactly what all these problems you have mentioned tonight on energy, on defense, on the cities, how these impact on inflation and what inflation is actually going to be over five years.


CONGRESSMAN ANDERSON: Ms. Quinn, I would be very happy to accept the challenge of your question tonight, to tell the voters of this country exactly what I think it is going to cost, because I believe that all too often in past elections politicians have simply been promising people things that they cannot deliver. When these presidential debates were held just four years ago, I remember the incumbent President, who was willing to debate, President Ford, telling the American people that they simply ought not to vote for somebody who promised more than they could deliver.


Well, we have seen what has happened. We havent gotten either the economies in government that were promised; we havent gotten the 4 percent inflation that we were supposed to get at the end of Mr. Carters first term. Instead, we had, I think, in the second quarter of Consumer Price Index registering around 12 percent, and nobody really knows with the latest increase in the Wholesale Price Index, that is about 18 percent on an annualized basis, what it is going to be.


Let me say this. I think my programs are far less inflationary than those of Governor Reagan. His own running mate, when he was running for the presidency, said that they would cost 30 percent inflation inside of two years, and he cited his leading economic advisor, a very distinguished economist, Paul McEvoy, as the source of that information. He went so far as to call it voodoo economics.


I have been very careful, I have been very careful in saying that what I am going to do is to bring federal spending under control first. I would like to stand here and promise the American people a tax cut as Governor Reagan has done, but you know, it has gotten to be about a $122 difference. Somebody worked it out, and they figured out that between the tax cut that Governor Reagan is promising the American people, and the tax cut that Jimmy Carter is promising in 1981, his is worth about $122 more.


So you, dear voters, are out there on the auction block, and these two candidates are bidding for your voles, and one is going to give you $122 more if you happen to be in that range of about $20,000 a year income.


I am going to wait until I see that that inflation rate is going down before I even begin to phase in the business tax cuts that I have talked about. But I think by improving productivity, they would be far less inflationary than the consumption oriented tax cut that Governor Reagan is recommending.


MR. MOYERS: Ms. Quinn?


MS. QUINN: Mr. Anderson, I will call you for that forecast.


Mr. Reagan, will you publish specific forecasts within two weeks so that the voters can have time to analyze and absorb them before the election showing exactly what all these things you have discussed tonight for energy, cities and defense, mean for inflation over the next five years?


GOVERNOR REAGAN: Ms. Quinn, I dont have to. I have done it. I have a backup paper to my economic speech of a couple of weeks ago in Chicago that gives all of the figures, and we used, yes, we used the Senate Budget Committees projections for five years which are based on an average inflation rate of 7 percent which I think that under our plan can be eliminated, and eliminated probably more quickly than our plan, but we wanted to be so conservative with it that people would see how well it could be done.


Now, John has been in the Congress for 20 years, and John tells us that first we have got to reduce spending before we can reduce taxes. But if you have go a kid that is extravagant, you can lecture him all you want to about his extravagance, or you can cut his allowance and achieve the same end much quicker.


But government has never reduced, government does not tax to get the money it needs. Government always needs the money it gets, and when John talks about his non-inflationary plan, as far as I have been able to learn, there are 88 proposals in it that call for additional government spending programs.


Now, I speak with some confidence of our plan because I took over a state, California, 10 percent of the population of this nation, a state that if it were a nation would be the seventh ranking economic power in the world, and that state, we controlled spending, we cut the rate of increase in spending in half. But at the same time, we gave back to the people of California in tax rebates, tax credits, tax cuts $5,700,000,000. I vetoed 993 measures without having a veto overturned, and among those vetoes, I stopped $16 billion in additional spending. And the funny thing was that California, which is normally above the national average in inflation and unemployment, for those six years, for the first time, was below the national average in both inflation and unemployment.


We have considered inflation in our figures. We deliberately took figures that we ourselves believed were too conservative. I believe the budget can be balanced by 1982 or 1983, and it is a combination of planned reduction of the tax increase that Carter has built into the economy, and that is what he is counting on for his plan, that he is going to get a half a trillion dollars more over the next five years that he can use for additional programs, or hopefully someplace down the line balancing the budget.


We believe that that is too much additional money to take out of the pockets of the people.


MR. MOYERS: Mr. Anderson.


CONGRESSMAN ANDERSON: Mr. Moyers, I am not here to debate Governors Reagans record as governor. This is 1980 and not 1966. But I do know that despite his pledge to reduce state government spending, that it rose from $4.6 billion which to took office in 1967 to $10.2 billion during his eight years in office, spending, in other words, more than double, and it rose at a faster rate than spending was rising in the federal government.


But on his very optimistic figures about his tax cut producing a balanced budget by 1983, and the fact that he is using, he says, the figures of the Senate Budget Committee, that Senate Budget Committee report does not accommodate all of the Reagan defense plans. It doesnt accommodate the expenditures that he calls for accelerated development and deployment of a new manned strategic bomber, for a permanent fleet in the Indian Ocean, for the restoration of the fleet to 600 ships, to the development and deployment of a dedicated, modern aircraft interceptor. In other words, I have seen his program costed out to the point where it would amount to more than $300 million a year just for the military. And I think the figures that he has given are simply not going to stand up.


MR. MOYERS: Would you have a comment, Mr. Reagan?


GOVERNOR REAGAN: Well, some people look up figures and some people make up figures, and John has just made up some very interesting figures. We took the Senate report, of course, but we did factor in our own ideas with regard to increases in the projected military spending that we believe would over a period of time do what is necessary.


Now, also with regard to the figures about California, the truth of the matter is we did cut the increase in spending in half. John doesnt quite realize - - he has never held an executive position of that kind, and I think being Governor of California is probably the closest thing to the presidency, if that is possible, of any executive job in America today because it is the most populous state, and I can only tell him that we reduced in proportion to other states the per capita spending, the per capita size of government. We only increased the size of government one-twelfth what it had increased in the preceding eight years. And one journal, the San Francisco Chronicle, a respected newspaper, said there was no question about the fact that Governor Reagan had prevented the State of California from going bankrupt.


MR. MOYERS: Our final question comes from Soma Golden, and it is directed to Mr. Reagan.


MS. GOLDEN: I would like to switch the focus from inflation to God.


This week Cardinal Mederas of Boston warned Catholics that is sinful to vote for candidates who favor abortion. This did not defeat the two men he opposed, but it did raise questions about the role of the church and state.


You, Mr. Reagan, have endorsed the participation of fundamentalist churches in your campaign; and you, Mr. Anderson, have tried three times to amend the Constitution to recognize the law and authority of Jesus Christ.


My question: Do you approve of the Churchs actions this week in Boston, and should a President be guided by organized religion on issues like abortion, equal rights, and defense spending?


MR. MOYERS: Mr. Reagan.


GOVERNOR REAGAN: It is my question.


Well, whether I agree or disagree with some individual or what he may say or how he may say it, I dont think there is any way that we can suggest that because people believe in God and go to church, that they should not want reflected in those people and those causes they support their own belief in morality and in the high traditions and principles which we have abandoned so much in this country.


Going around this country, I think that I have found a great hunger in America for a spiritual revival, for a belief that law must be based on a higher law, for a return to traditions and values that we once had. Our government, in its most sacred documents, the Constitution and the Declaration of Independence and all, speak of man being created, of a Creator, that we are a nation under God.


Now, I have thought for a long time that too many of our churches have been too reluctant to speak up in behalf of what they believe is proper in government, and they have been too lax in interfering in recent years with governments invasion of the family itself, putting itself between parent and child. I vetoed a number of bills of that kind myself when I was in California.


Now, whether it is right for, on a single issue, for anyone to advocate that someone should not be elected or not , I wont take a position on that. But I do believe that no one in this country should be denied the right to express themselves, or to even try to persuade others to follow their lead. That is what elections are all about.


MR. MOYERS: Ms. Golden?


MS. GOLDEN: Okay. I would point out that churches are tax-exempt institutions, and I will repeat my question.


Do you approve the Churchs action this week in Boston, and should a President be guided by organized religion on issues like abortion, equal rights and defense spending?


CONGRESSMAN ANDERSON: Ms. Golden, certainly the Church has the right to take a position on moral issues, but to try as occurred in the case that you mentioned, that specific case, to try to tell the parishioners of any church, of any denomination, how they should vote or for whom they should vote, I think violates the principle of separation of church and state.


Now, Governor Reagan is running on a platform that calls for a constitutional amendment banning abortion. I think that is a moral issue that ought to be left to the freedom of conscience of the individual, and for the state to interfere with a constitutional amendment and tell a woman that she must carry that pregnancy to term regardless of her personal belief, that I think violates freedom of conscience as much as anything that I can think of.


And he is also running on platform that suggests a litmus test for the selection of judges, that only judges that hold a certain view on the sanctity of family life ought to be appointed to the federal judiciary, one of the three great independent branches of our government.


No, I believe in freedom of choice. I dont believe in constitutional amendments that would interfere with that. I dont believe in trying to legislate new tests for the selection of the federal judiciary. On the amendment that you mentioned, I abandoned it fifteen years ago, and I have said freely all over this country that it was a mistake for me or anyone to ever try to put the Judeo-Christian heritage of this country, important as it is, and important as my religious faith is to me, it is a very deeply personal matter, but for me to try in this very pluralistic society of ours to try to frame any definition whatever of what that belief should be is wrong.


And so not once, but twice in 1971, I voted on the floor of the House of Representatives against a constitutional amendment that tried to bring prayer back into the public schools, I think mother ought to whisper to Johnny and to Susie as they button their coats in the morning and leave for the classroom, be sure to say a prayer before you start your days work.


But I dont think that the state, the board of regents, a board of education or any state official should try to compose that prayer for a child recite.


MR. MOYERS: Mr. Reagan.


GOVERNOR REAGAN: The litmus test that John says is in the Republican Platform says no more than the judges to be appointed should have a respect for innocent life.


Now, I dont think that is a bad idea. I think all of us should have a respect for innocent life.


With regard to the freedom of the individual for choice with regard to abortion, there is one individual who is not being considered at all, and that is the one who is being aborted. And I have noticed that everybody that is for abortion has already been born.


I think that technically - - I know this is a difficult and an emotional problem, and many people sincerely feel on both sides of this, but I do believe that maybe we could find the answer through medical evidence if we would determine once and for all, is an unborn child a human being? I happen to believe it is.


MR. MOYERS: Mr. Anderson.


CONGRESSMAN ANDERSON: I also think that that unborn child has a right to be wanted, and I also believe, sir, that the most personal, intimate decision that any woman is ever called upon to make is a decision as to whether or not she shall carry a pregnancy to term. And for the state to interfere in that decision, under whatever guise, and with whatever rationale, for the state to try to take over in that situation and by edict command what the individual shall do and substitute itself for that individuals conscience, for her right to consult her rabbi, her minister, her priest, her doctor, and other counselor of her choice, I think goes beyond what we want to ever see accomplished in this country if we really believe in the First Amendment, if we really believe in freedom of choices and the right of the individual.


MR. MOYERS: Mr. Reagan, you now have three minutes for closing remarks.


GOVERNOR REAGAN: Before beginning my closing remarks here, I would just like to remark a concern that I have that we have criticized the failures of the Carter policy here rather considerably, both of us this evening, and there might be some feeling of unfairness about this because he was not here to respond. But I believe it would have been much more unfair to have had John Anderson denied the right to participate in this debate.


And I want to express my appreciation to the League of Women Voters for adopting a course with which I believe the great majority of Americans are in agreement.


Now, as to my closing remarks, I have always believed that this land was placed here between the two great oceans by some divine plan. It was placed here to be found by a special kind of people, people who had a special love for freedom and who had the courage to uproot themselves and leave hearth and homeland and come to what in the beginning was the most undeveloped wilderness possible.


We came from a hundred different corners of the earth; we spoke a multitude of tongues; landed on this eastern shore and then went out over the mountains and the prairies and the deserts and the far western mountains to the Pacific, building cities and towns and farms and schools and churches. If wind, water or fire destroyed them, we build them again, and in so doing, at the same time, we build a new breed of human called an American, a proud, and independent, and a most compassionate individual for the most part.


Two hundred years ago Tom Paine, when the thirteen tiny colonies were trying to become a nation, said We have it in our power to begin the world over again. Today we are confronted with the horrendous problems that we have discussed here tonight, and some people in high positions of leadership tell us that the answer is to retreat, that the best is over, that we must cut back, that we must share in an ever-increasing scarcity, that we must, in the failure to be able to protect our national security as it is today, we must not be provocative to any possible adversary.


Well, we, the living Americans, have gone through four wars. We have gone through a great depression in our lifetime that literally was worldwide and almost brought us to our knees. But we came through all of those things, and we achieved even new heights and new greatness.


The living Americans today have fought harder, paid a higher price for freedom and done more to advance the dignity of man than any people who ever lived on this earth. For two hundred years we have lived in the future, believing that tomorrow would be better than today, and today would be better than yesterday.


I still believe that. I am not running for the presidency because I believe that I can solve the problems we have discussed tonight. I believe the people of this country can, and together we can begin the world over again. We can meet our destiny, and that destiny is to build a land here that will be for all mankind a shining city on a hill.


I think we ought to get at it.


MR. MOYER: Mr. Anderson, you have the final three minutes.


CONGRESSMAN ANDERSON: Mr. Moyers, President Carter was not right a few weeks ago when he said that the American people were confronted with only two choices, with only two men, and with only two parties. I think you have seen tonight in this debate that Governor Reagan and I have agreed on exactly one thing, that we are both against the reimposition of a peacetime draft. We have disagreed, I believe, on virtually every other issue.


I respect him for showing tonight, for appearing here, and I thank the League of Women Voters for the opportunity that they have given me. I am running for President as an independent because I believe our country is in trouble. I believe that all of us are going to have to begin to work together to solve our problems.


If you think that I am a spoiler, consider these facts, Do you really think that our economy is healthy? Do you really think that 8 million Americans being out of work and that 50 percent unemployment among the youth of our country are acceptable? Do you really think that our armed forces are really acceptably strong in those areas of conventional capability where they should be? Do you think that our political institutions are working the way they should when literally only half of our citizens vote?


I dont think you do think that, and therefore I think you ought to consider doing something about it and voting for an independent in 1980.


You know, a generation of office-seekers has tried to tell the American people that they could get something for nothing. It has been a time, therefore, of illusion and false hopes, and the longer it continues, the more dangerous it becomes. We have got to stop drifting.


What I wish tonight so desperately is that we had had more time to talk about some of the other issues that are so fundamentally important. The great historian Henry Steele Commager said that In their lust for victory, neither traditional party is looking beyond November. And he went on to cite three issues that their platforms totally ignored: atomic warfare - - Presidential Directive 59 notwithstanding, if we dont resolve that issue, all others become irrelevant; the issue of our natural resources, the right of posterity to inherit the earth, and what kind of earth will it be; the issue of nationalism, the recognition, he says, that every major problem confronting us is global and cannot be solved by nationalism here or elsewhere, that is chauvinistic, that is parochial, that is as anachronistic as states rights was in the days of Jefferson Davis.


Those are some of the great issues, atomic warfare, the use of our natural resources, and the issue of nationalism, that I intend to be talking about in the remaining six weeks of the campaign, and I dare hope that the American people will be listening and that they will see that an independent government of John Anderson and Patrick Lucey can give us the kind of coalition government that we need in 1980 to begin to solve our problems.


Thank you.


MR. MOYERS: Mr. Anderson, we, too, wish there were more time, and for all the limitations of the forum - - and there are other forums to try - - the Chair for one would like to see such meetings become a regular and frequent part of every presidential campaign.


Mr. Reagan, Mr. Anderson, we thank you for coming, and thanks to our panelists, Carol Loomis, Daniel Greenberg, Charles Corddry, Lee May, Jane Bryant Quinn, and Soma Golden.


And thank you in the audience at home for joining us.


The first presidential debate of 1980 has been brought to you as a public service by the League of Women Voters Education Fund.


Im Bill Moyers. Good night.


#
#Televised Address by Governor Ronald Reagan A Strategy for Peace in the 80s
#

Good Evening.

Three months ago, in accepting the nomination of my party to be its presidential candidate, I said: Of all the objectives we seek, first and foremost is the establishment of lasting world peace.


Since I spoke those words, I have had the chance to visit with Americans like you, all across the nation. I have brought that same message of peace as our primary goal.


But it hasnt all been one-sided. I have had the chance not only to talk with you but also to listen to you about the course you believe our country should take. We have, in a way, been holding a national conversation together on the future of our country.


Tonight, I want to continue my part of that ongoing conversation, and offer what I believe are ways in which peace can be assured for every American family and for the world.


But before I do, Id like to speak to you for a few moments now, not as a candidate for the Presidency, but as a citizen, a parent in fact, a grandparent who shares with you the deep and abiding hope for peace.


I revere, as I know you do, the American tradition of free and reasoned discussion of our complex issues. That is why I have participated in six debates since I became a candidate for President. And that is why I have stated my willingness to engage President Carter in his first debate.


The great tradition of reasoned exchange of views has not exactly characterized all the rhetoric of this campaign. My own views have been distorted in what I can only conclude is an effort to scare people through innuendoes and misstatements of my positions.


Possibly Mr. Carter is gambling that his long litany of fear will somehow influence enough voters to save him from the inevitable consequences of the policies of his administration which have brought so much human misery.


I am confident he will lose that gamble. I think the American people know to paraphrase Franklin Roosevelt that the only thing the cause of peace has to fear is fear itself.


Let us base our decisions about peace and security on the facts, on what we need to know and not on what we are told we must fear.


There can be no doubt about what is the major issue in this campaign concerning the question of peace.


It is whether you believe Mr. Carters words and deeds have brought the United States closer to or further away from the goal of peace based on confidence in the strength of our nation.


As a presidential candidate four years ago, he said: it is imperative that the world know that we will meet obligations and commitments to our allies and that we will keep our nation strong.


Did he keep his promise? Thats the real peace issue in 1980. And thats an issue for you to decide. Has he kept our nation strong? Are you willing to risk four more years of what we have now? Has the registration and the possible draft of your sons and daughters contributed to your peace of mind? Is the world safer for you and your family?


Whatever else history may say about my candidacy. I hope it will be recorded that I appealed to our best hopes, not our worst fears, to our confidence rather than our doubts, to the facts, and not to fantasies.


And these three hope, confidence, and facts are at the heart of my vision of peace.


We have heard the phrase peace through strength so often, its meaning has become blurred through overuse.


The time has come for America to recall once more the basic truths behind the familiar words.


Peace is made by the fact of strength economic, military, and strategic.


Peace is lost when such strength disappears or just as bad is seen by an adversary as disappearing.


We must build peace upon strength. There is no other way. And the cold, hard fact of the matter is that our economic, military, and strategic strength under President Carter is eroding.


Only if we are strong will peace be strong.


Throughout Scripture, we see reference to peace-makers those who through their actions not just their words take the material of this imperfect world and, with hard work and Gods help, fashion from that material peace for the world.


In recent weeks youve been hearing from a lot of other people as to what they say I believe about peace. Well, tonight let me tell you what I believe.


Understanding of how peace is obtained through competence and hard work, confidence, and patience must guide and inspire this nation in the years ahead.


And at the center of such peace-making is the need to restore our historic American tradition of bipartisanship.


The cause of peace knows no party. The cause of peace transcends personal ambition. The cause of peace demands appeals for unity, not appeals to divisiveness.


These are truisms which Mr. Carter has forgotten or chosen to ignore.


Senator Ted Kennedy said earlier this year, in reference to him, that no president should be reelected because he happened to be standing there when his foreign policy collapsed around him.


I cannot believe this administrations defense policies reflect the thinking of millions of rank-and-file Democrat party members. The Carter administration, dominated as it is by the McGovernite wing of the party, has broken sharply with the views and policies of Harry Truman, John Kennedy, and many contemporary Democratic leaders.


A great American tradition of bipartisanship where domestic political differences end at the waters edge has been lost at a time when we are faced with growing instability and crisis abroad. I believe the bipartisan tradition is too deep and sound to be destroyed by one man in the space of four years, but still, damage has been done and it will take a determined effort to repair it.


I pledge, if elected President, to take every step necessary to restore the bipartisan tradition in American national security and foreign policy; to work with congressional leaders of both parties to design and conduct a truly bipartisan tradition in American national security and foreign policy. And, I intend to have this bipartisan spirit reflected during my presidency in key foreign and defense policy appointive positions. As in the past, our domestic differences will end at the waters edge.


In the next few minutes, I would like to outline for you nine specific steps that I will take to put America on a sound, secure footing in the international arena. Working closely with the Congress, I propose to accomplish these steps with the support of an informed American public. Here are the steps:


An improved policy-making structure;
A clear approach to East-West relations;
A realistic policy toward our own Hemisphere;
A plan to assist African and Third World development;
A plan to send our message abroad;
A realistic strategic arms reduction policy;
A determined effort to strengthen the quality of our armed services;
Combating international terrorism;
Restoration of a margin of safety in our defense planning.

Reorganizing the Policy-Making Structure


The present administration has been unable to speak with one voice in foreign policy. This must change. My administration will restore leadership to U.S. foreign policy by organizing it in a more coherent way.


An early priority will be to make structural changes in the foreign policy-making machinery so that the Secretary of State will be the Presidents principal spokesman and adviser.


The National Security Council will once again be the coordinator of the policy process. Its mission will be to assure that the President receives an orderly, balanced flow of information and analysis. The National Security Adviser will work closely in teamwork with the Secretary of State and the other members of the Council.


My goal also will be to build and utilize a diplomatic corps with language proficiency, and organizational and professional skills, and to insure the safety of our representatives on duty overseas. We can restore pride and effectiveness in our foreign policy establishment by putting an end to kidnapping and murder of our public servants in service abroad.


Relations with Friends and Adversaries


With effective machinery in place, we must first address the conduct of our relations with our allies, with the Soviet Union, and with the Peoples Republic of China.


Confidence and trust in the United States has fallen to an all-time low. This must be reversed. The United States has an important leadership role, and this role can be effective only if our alliances are cemented by unity of purpose and mutual respect.


Worldwide, our allies are stronger, most are robust and healthy. But the challenge of the 1980s is to assemble that strength in a manner which allows us to pursue the objective of peace together. If our alliances are divided, only our adversaries benefit.


With our allies, we can conduct a realistic and balanced policy toward the Soviet Union. I am convinced that the careful management of our relationship with the Soviet Union depends on a principled, consistent American foreign policy. We seek neither confrontation nor conflict, but to avoid both, we must remain strong and determined to protect our interests.


Our relationship with the Peoples Republic of China is in its beginning stages. It is one that can and will grow, and I repeat my intention to assist its rapid growth. There is an historic bond of friendship between the American and Chinese peoples, and I will work to amplify it wherever possible. Expanded trade, cultural contact and other arrangements will all serve the cause of preserving and extending the ties between our two countries.


A Realistic Policy for the Western Hemisphere


No area of the world should have a higher priority than the place where we live, the Western Hemisphere. My administration will forge a new, more realistic policy toward our own Hemisphere as an integral part of my program for peace.


In four years, Mr. Carters administration has managed to alienate our friends in the Hemisphere, to encourage the destabilization of governments, and to permit Cuban and Soviet influence to grow.


We must take steps to change the Carter administrations sorry record of vacillation, alienation, and neglect in the region.


Our relations must be solidly based on shared economic and security interests, not upon mutual recrimination and insult.


We will initiate a program of intensive economic development with cooperating countries in the Caribbean. Many of these countries were given their independence and then promptly forgotten. In their natural resentment, some have turned to extremist models fertile ground for Cuban meddling. Our programs will assist them both financially and technically to make the best use of their resources in agriculture, industry, and tourism.


Closer to home, I have spoken before of my belief that we should work toward a North American Accord with our immediate neighbors, Mexico and Canada. This would take the form of broadened, more open lines of communication between us to seek ways in which we can strengthen our traditional friendship. If Canada and Mexico are stronger, our entire Hemisphere benefits.


A Policy to Assist African and Third World Development


Our relationship with what has often been called the Third World must form an important part of any program for peace. A strong American economy and the spirit of our free enterprise system have a great deal to offer the poorer, less developed nations of the world. Africans, for example, look to us and our industrial allies for the dominant share of their export markets, for their investment capital, for official aid, and for technical know-how.


Yet, the flow of American investment to Africa continues at only a trickle, and our export promotion has been neglected.


My administration will recognize that investment from the private sector know-how, technology, and marketing assistance is the key to African development. Government will help promote this, not intervene to make it more difficult.


Sending the American Message


Proclaiming the American message is a vital step in the program for peace.


I will strengthen the United States International Communication Agency, including the Voice of America. We will also strengthen Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty. Compared with other costs of our national security, the dollar amounts involved in this are small. What is needed most is a sense of conviction, the conviction that by carrying the American message abroad we strengthen the foundation of peace.


The current administration has permitted these vital efforts to decline.


For instance, the United States has been unable to broadcast to a majority of the Afghan people during these critical years, yet all the while Soviet-sponsored broadcasts were stirring up hatred toward America throughout the Islamic world.


For our long-term strategy, the communication of our ideals must become part of our strategy for peace.


We have a story to tell about the differences between the two systems now competing for the hearts and minds of mankind. There is the poverty and despair in the emerging nations who adopt Marxist totalitarianism and, by contrast, the freedom and prosperity of free market countries like Taiwan, South Korea, and Singapore.


A Realistic Strategic Arms Reduction Policy


As the next requirement for a program for peace, I would assign a high priority to strategic arms reduction. I have repeatedly said in this campaign that I will sit down with the Soviet Union for as long as it takes to negotiate a balanced and equitable arms limitation agreement, designed to improve the prospects for peace. To succeed at arms control, however, we must first be honest with ourselves so that we can be convincing with the Soviets.


We must honestly face the facts of the arms competition in which we are caught. And, we must have a view of the world that is consistent with these facts and that does not change to suit different audiences. The Carter administration told Congress that the Soviet Union has long been investing about three times as much as we have in strategic arms and is expected to continue doing so, with or without SALT the Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty.


The Senate Foreign Relations Committee, controlled by a Democratic majority, in a narrow vote came out for the Treaty, but only after more than 20 changes had been made. Then, on December 20, 1979, the Senate Armed Services Committee, also controlled by a Democratic majority, voted 10-0 with seven abstentions to adopt a report which concluded and I urge you to listen closely to these words: that the SALT II Treaty as it now stands, is not in the national security interests of the United States of America. Finally, Mr. Carter could not even muster the necessary votes to pass his SALT Treaty in the United States Senate yes, controlled by a Democratic majority even before the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan.


It would appear that members of his own party are trying to tell Mr. Carter something is flawed in his approach to arms limitation.


Please listen to the following statement:


I must admit that I am not at all pleased that those of us expressing reservations and concern regarding the Treaty are characterized by some as warmongers.


Ladies and gentlemen, that statement was made by a Democratic Senator, a Marine veteran, a former astronaut, and a man who, in 1976, Jimmy Carter considered for his vice-presidential running mate John Glenn of Ohio.


I think its time that you, the American people, heard some straight talk about Mr. Carters SALT II Treaty. The real truth about that Treaty is that Mr. Carter himself doomed its fate from the moment it was negotiated. It has been effectively blocked, not by Ronald Reagan, but by the United States Senate your elected representatives from all over the nation, fulfilling their constitutional obligation to advise and consent on treaties. It has been critically denounced by dozens of the most eminent scholars and knowledgeable analysts, Democrat as well as Republican.


As president, I will make immediate preparation for negotiations on a SALT III Treaty. My goal is to begin arms reductions. My energies will be directed at reducing destructive nuclear weaponry in the world and doing it in such a way as to protect fully the critical security requirements of our nation.


The way to avoid an arms race is not simply to let the Soviets race ahead. We need to remove their incentive to race ahead by making it clear to them that we can and will compete if need be, at the same time we tell them that we prefer to halt this competition and reduce the nuclear arsenals by patient negotiation.


Restoring the Quality of our Armed Forces


Restoring a sense of pride in their careers for the men and women in our armed services is another important element of my program for peace. We must direct our attention to the urgent manpower needs of our services. In defense matters, we hear much about hardware, not enough about people. The most important part of our military strength is the people involved their quality, their training, and their welfare. We must do all in our power to make sure they are well-trained and well-equipped, that they feel proud and secure in their jobs and that their economic sacrifice is not out of proportion to what we ask of them. The economic policies of the Carter administration have made life especially difficult for our men and women in uniform and for their families.


We can reverse this situation. We can implement a program of compensation and benefits for military personnel that is comparable to what is available in the private sector. I will ask Congress to reinstate the G.I. Bill, a program which was directly responsible for the most rapid advance ever in the educational level of our population. Our country must provide our service personnel and their families with the security, the incentives, and the quality of life to compensate for the sacrifices they make on our behalf.


Combating International Terrorism


Let us turn now to the need for the United States to assume a leadership role in curbing the spread of international terrorism. In sharing the outrage against terrorism, I will direct the resources of my administration against this scourge of civilization and toward expansion of our cooperation with other nations in combating terrorism in its many forms.


Terrorists seek to undermine, paralyze and, finally, destroy democratic governments. Israel has long been the victim of the most wanton acts of terrorism. Our allies in Europe and elsewhere have experienced terrorism with increasing frequency.


Terrorist organizations have enjoyed the support covert and open of the Soviet Union. In Iran, terrorism has been elevated to the level of national policy in the assault on the U.S. Embassy and the year-long captivity of our fellow-citizens. The tactics and philosophy of the Palestine Liberation Organization are also based on terrorism.


We must restore the ability of the C.I.A. and other intelligence agencies to keep us informed and forewarned about terrorist activities and we must take the lead in forging an international consensus that firmness and refusal to concede or to pay ransom are ultimately the only effective deterrents to terrorism.


Restoring Our Margin of Safety for Peace


An important step perhaps the most important of all in a systematic program for peace is to restore the margin of safety for peace in our defense program by working closely with the Congress on a long-term program designed to meet our needs throughout this critical decade.


We must ask ourselves, is America more secure? Are we more confident of peace in the world than we were just four years ago? You know the answer to those questions: it is no.


President Ford left a long-range defense program designed to keep America strong throughout the 80s. He recognized that, after years of negotiation, the Soviet Union was still bent upon surpassing the United States in overall strategic strength.


Wisely, he did not give up on arms control negotiations, but sought to provide us with an insurance policy in the form of a balanced program to keep us from falling behind.


But, the Carter administration, in its haste to make good on a reckless campaign promise to cut defense spending by billions of dollars, insisted on a policy of systematic concessions in defense and in arms control negotiations.


Now Ive criticized the President, I will admit, for not having kept his campaign promises. But in this case, Im sorry to say, he did keep his promise. He has weakened our defense capability and wiped out our margin of safety.


My task as President will be to strengthen our defenses and to lead our allies in a sustained and prudent effort to keep us, and the entire world, secure from confrontation. The preservation of peace will require the best resources we can marshal in this precarious decade. We can marshal them by reaffirming our national purpose, by reasserting our will and determination, and by regaining our economic vitality.


But each of these approaches to establishing a real peace must rest on the firm underpinning of a strong American economy.


Tragically, the weakened state of Americas economy has significantly affected our ability to have the strongest possible foreign and defense policies. Maintaining our strength requires having our people in productive jobs, not in unemployment lines. It requires having our citizens confident that their future will not continue to be eroded away by incredibly high inflation and interest rates. It demands a strong dollar that encourages other nations to trust us.


Our inflation has especially undermined the dollar and has upset world markets. Our trading partners now question our reliability. And when they question our economic reliability, they begin to question our reliability as a strong ally.


Our failed energy policies have caused many of our allies to blame the United States for the worlds energy problem as much as OPEC. Neglect of energy realities diminishes our diplomatic strength. But worse, our dependence on imported oil also weakens our strategic position.


We can indeed make peace. We can have the peace we want for ourselves and for our children. We are going to have to work hard and think hard and act with competence and with confidence but it can be done.


And, as we work, we will have to be inspired by the vision of what our country means to us and to the world.


In recent weeks, I have had that vision of our nations meaning brought to my attention in a very personal way.


The home in which Nancy and I are temporarily living in the Virginia countryside during this campaign is only a relatively short distance away from the home of a great American President, Thomas Jefferson.


In his first Inaugural Address, Jefferson spoke of the preservation of the general government in its whole constitutional vigor, as the sheet-anchor of our peace at home and our safety abroad. He knew that peace in the world depended on the strength of our nation in its whole constitutional vigor.


Jefferson loved America and the cause of peace too too much ever to give in or appeal to fear and doubt.


I have known four wars in my lifetime I dont want to see a fifth. I pray that never again will we bleed a generation of young Americans into the sands of island beachheads, the mud of European battlefields, or the rice paddies or jungles of Asia.


Whether we like it or not, it is our responsibility to preserve world peace because no one else can do it. We cannot continue letting events and crises get out of control, we must through sound management and planning be in control so as to prevent being confronted by a crisis. This requires a sound economy, a strong national defense, and the will and determination to preserve peace and freedom.


Recently, I was on the campaign trail in the state where I was born and raised, Illinois.


Nancy and I traveled down through the central and southern part of the state by bus and car in a motorcade, stopping at lovely towns; we visited a coal mine typical of our industrial capacity; saw for the first time the tomb of Abraham Lincoln in Springfield. We toured a productive family farm and saw again the amazing gift for technology that the American farmer has and how much he contributes to eliminating hunger in the world. At the end of the day we stood on the banks of the Mississippi beneath that great silver arch there in St. Louis, Missouri.


It was a beautiful, crisp autumn day. Thousands of families had come out to see us at every stop. It was a moving experience, but I was most moved, as I always am, by the young people, the youngsters from the little ones perched on their fathers shoulders to the teenagers. You get a rebirth of optimism about our nations future when you see their young faces.


They are what this campaign is all about. Renewing our spirit, securing their future in a world at peace is the legacy I would like to leave for them.


You know, one of the signers of the Declaration of Independence said it isnt important that we leave wealth to our children, it is important that we leave them freedom. And we can only have that freedom if we continue to have peace throughout the world.


Thank you and good evening.

#
#A Vital Economy: Jobs, Growth, and Progress for Americans
#

Novelist Thomas Wolfe once wrote of our country, there is a mighty music to the proud, glittering names of places in America.

During this campaign, I have visited places in America with such proud names, each name synonymous with the growth and progress that once made the American economy the envy of the world.

Steubenville and Detroit, Youngstown and Buffalo, Pittsburgh and Seattle, Houston and Hartford and Jersey City and Lima, cities like New York and small towns like Greenville, Illinoisthe very sound of these American names evokes a feeling of confidence and strength based upon what Americans have built through hard work.

But in many places the mighty music has been all but silenced. Where once there was the great, confident roar of American progress and growth and optimism, there is now the eerie, ghostly silence of economic stagnation, unemployment, inflation, and despair.

If you are like most Americans, you and your family know the sound of that silence.

You experience it around the dinner table when there is a discussion of how to pay for the childrens education.

You experience it in supermarkets when you pick up an item, look at the price, and--placing it back on the shelf--move on.

You or a loved one may have personally experienced that silence in the place where you once workedwhen it had to shut down.

On street corners of our city neighborhoods it is a silence filled with anger and bitterness; on farms it is a puzzled silence, filled with questions of how things could go so wrong in a land as blessed as ours.

Yes, the mighty music of American economic progress has been all but silenced by four years of Mr. Carters failures. This election will determine whether the nation and the world will ever again hear that great sound; will determine if the dinner table of your home and the supermarkets of your neighborhood will ever again be places where plans can be made and necessities can be purchased without the gnawing doubt and, yes, fear, brought by Mr. Carters inflation and unemployment.

Mr. Carter recently was asked by a young woman why our country could not work out a solution to unemployment and inflation.

His response was startling even by the rather extraordinary standards he has set in this campaign. He said:You know, people tend to dwell on temporary inconveniences and the transient problems that our nation faces. Unemployment a temporary inconvenience? Inflation a transient problem? These words from an American President?

Recently, he told a group of labor officials his opinion of the coming election. He said:

Its more important than your income. Its more important than the quality of the house that you have. Its more important than the neighborhood where you and your wife might ultimately retire.

Is Mr. Carters chance of reelection as important as what has been done to your income, your home, your neighborhood, and your family?

Douglas Fraser, President of the United Auto Workers, in a recent interview, was asked about the support I have been getting from union members all across America. Mr. Fraser, an avowed Carter supporter, said:

Theres an absolute correlation between unemployment and Reagans support among blue-collar workers, including members of our union. . . .And weve been preaching for years that the workers vote their pocketbook. Now, if they vote their pocketbook this time, were in trouble. This is the kind of economics that the President told us in May of 1977 at our convention that he would never tolerate. . . .unless the people understand. . .this anguish, this feeling of hopelessness, I think our society is going to be in trouble.

Let me remind you that those are the words of someone who publicly supports Mr. Carter. They are an extraordinary indictment of the Carter record and they accurately portray the feelings of many union members and their families, as well as many other Americans.

If this is what one of Mr. Carters chief supporters thinks of his policies, what should the rest of us think? Mr. Fraser says that if workers vote their pocketbooks in this election, we, meaning Mr. Carter and his allies, are in trouble. But the problem is that American workers are in trouble nowand if they dont vote their pocketbook, who is going to do it for them?

By the very standards Mr. Carter himself uses to measure presidential failure, he has failed.

He promised to bring inflation down to 4 percent. Its now running at double-digit rates, and hit 18.2 percent earlier this year. The producer price index the past three months has averaged an annual rate of some 13 percent. In fact, between January 1977 and August 1980, consumer prices have risen 42.3 percent.

In the fade of all this economic bad news, Mr. Carter has taken to telling voters that things will get better. But today we found the answer to that. The consumer price index released just this morning showed that the cost of living went up to an annual rate of 12.7 percent in September.

Inflation is not easing; it is rapidly rising. The double digit punishment of Jimmy Carter is not receding. At this rate it will continue to eat up your incomes, ravage those of you who are retired, and destabilize our entire economy.

No matter what Mr. Carter says, inflation is getting worse.

Right now, as I speak to you, nearly eight million American men and women are out of work. You or a loved one may be unfortunate enough to be one of them. Their distress is obvioussavings may be destroyed, houses may be lost, and families may go unfed.

As a candidate four years ago, Mr. Carter adopted what he called the misery index. He added the rate of inflation to the rate of unemployment and for 1976 it totaled 12.5 percent. This was his misery index and he suggested that no President has a right to seek reelection with an index of 12.5 percent. Today by his own standard he does not deserve reelection. The misery index is two-thirds higher than it was four years agoalmost 20 percent.

Interest rates are again rising. The prime rate was only 6 percent in January 1977. It is 14 percent and rising today. The mortgage rate for new homes was 9 percent in January 1977. It is 13 percent or higher today. It is now estimated that only one in eleven young families can now afford to purchase a homesomething that used to be the hallmark of the American dream.

Indeed, of all the sectors of the American economy, few have been hit so hard as housing. In 1979 our housing industry produced 1.7 million units. This year well be 500,000 short of that. To meet the real demand for housing, we should be building at least 800,000 more units this year.

When Jimmy Carter took office in 1977 a median priced new home sold for $47,400. It cost $306 a month to pay the mortgage on that home. Today that same home would cost $556 a monthan increase of 81 percent in just over three years.

Even Jimmy Carters Secretary of Housing and Urban Development admitted this last spring, conceding that for many hardworking people, the American dream is denied because housing is growing beyond their reach.

Productivity has fallen six straight quarters, as America continues to fall further behind our industrial competitors around the world. American workers are ready to compete, but American companies dont have the new plants and equipment for them to do so. More and more American jobs are exported overseas, and new jobs are not being created here at home.

A little more than a week ago the President said we are all better off than we were four years ago. He could have looked at the report of his own economic indicators and learned that in purchasing power the average American is 8 percent poorer than he was four years ago.

Total industrial production grew 10.8 percent in 1976. Total industrial production has fallen 6.7 percent this past year.

Thats not just a record of economic failure. That is failure on a scale so vast, in dimensions so broad, with effects so devastating, that it is virtually without parallel in American history.

The other day someone said: The Carter administration is giving failure a bad name. And they havent just failed last month or last year. Theyve been failing for four years.

On August 28th of this year Mr. Carter announced his fifth, new economic program. After four straight failures, its no wonder he wanted to wait until after the election and submit it to Congress next year.

Mr. Carter has blamed OPEC for inflation. Hes blamed the American people for inflation. Hes blamed the Federal Reserve Board for inflation. The symbol of this administration is a finger pointing at someone else.

And on October 14th, after spending most of the first part of the campaign running away from his economic record, he finally made a speech on the economy. And he came up with a new list of who, or what, to blame for inflation.

The number one item on his list was, and I quote: the failure to raise adequate revenues at a time of greatly increased public spending.

What that means in plain English is that he didnt raise our taxes enough.

Now, Mr. Carter has already imposed the two largest tax increases in our nations history. And by 1981, he will have succeeded in doubling the tax load on the American peoplethe equivalent of a tax increase on a family of four of more than $5,000 a year. Now, Id like to ask him: isnt that enough? Apparently notaccording to his economic plan, annual taxes will go up $86 billion next year alone, and $500 billion over the next five years.

I would also like to ask him why government spending isnt to blame. Hes increased government spending by nearly 60 percent in four years. It is this incredible increase in spending that has caused inflationary deficitsnot low taxes. We dont have inflation because we are living too well. We have it because government is living too well.

Mr. Carter is acting as if he hasnt been in charge for the past three and a half years; as if someone else ran up nearly $200 billion in federal red ink; as if someone else was responsible for the largest deficit, including off-budget items, in American history; and, as if someone else was predicting a budget deficit for this fiscal year that began October 1st of $30 billion or more.

He has other scapegoats for inflation, such as oil price increases. He doesnt explain why Japan and West Germany, who import practically all their oil, dont have our high inflation rates and economies in a state of crisis.

Finally, he blames the long decline in our productivity growth. I would like to ask him: which President has presided over six straight quarters of falling productivity? Which President by 1981 will have increased the punitive tax burden on our economy by some $300 billion? Which President has created two new cabinet departments and has increased the burden of federal regulations?

In the same speech Mr. Carter went on to misrepresent my economic program. You know, its one thing when his administration jimmies its own economic figures to make its record look good, but when he starts jimmying my figures, its going too far.

What our nation needswhat the American people wantis a humane economy, one that sees them not as interchangeable parts to whom unemployment is a temporary inconvenience but as individual human beings and members of families with feelings, hopes, and dreams. Earlier this year, Vice President Mondale summed up unforgettably the approach of the Carter administration toward the economic suffering of millions. He said, speaking of inflationary problems, We think what were doing now will be using unemployment for a while. We know that.

I dont think the American people want an administration that talks about unemployment as something to be used against Americans. You dont use the suffering of human beingsyou alleviate that suffering.

Tonight I want to share with you my vision of an economy that works for the people and doesnt seek to use them for policies made in Washington.

My plan, as I outlined in a speech in Chicago last month, is rooted in a strategy for economic growth, a program that sees the American economic system as it isa huge, complex, dynamic systemthat can work if the American people get a chance to work.

Tonight, because of time limits, I cant go into the same detail I did in Chicago but I want you to know that I stand by the specific points I made in that speech. At the heart of that strategy for economic growth are eight major steps:

1. We must keep the rate of growth of government spending at reasonable and prudent levels.

2. We must reduce personal income tax rates and accelerate and simplify depreciation schedules for business in an orderly, systematic way to provide incentives to work, savings, investment, and productivity.

3. We must review regulations that affect the economy, and change or eliminate them to encourage economic growth.

4. We must establish a stable, sound, and predictable monetary policy.

5. We must promote the export of American products aboard.

6. We must revitalize American industry.

7. We must adopt an energy policy that will allow our economy to grow, and our standard of living to rise.

8. And we must restore confidence by following a consistent national economic policy that does not change from month to month.

One of the most critical elements of my economic program is the control of government spending. Billions of dollars of waste, extravagance, fraud, and abuse in federal agencies simply are being ignored, for all practical purposes, by the Carter administration.

Let me give you one exampleand there are, sadly, manyto show you what happens to the dollars you send to Washington.

A couple of years ago one of the worst scandals in the history of the federal government broke out in the General Services Administration, the agency that buys government supplies and manages federal property.

There were more than 130 indictments, and GSA auditors estimated they were looking for $100 million lost to fraud and another $130 million lost to mismanagement every year.

Mr. Carters answer to all of this was politics-as-usual. The GSA mess is still not cleaned up and the men who tried to clean it up are no longer in the GSA.

Let me make a pledge to you tonight: If you give me the opportunity, I will put the corruption fighters back in charge at GSA to finish the job they started, and that goes for every department, agency, and bureau in the executive branch.

I am confident that we can squeeze at least 2 percent out of what otherwise would be spent in fiscal year 1981, adding 2 percent the next year, and so on, up to 7 percent by fiscal year 1985. And that is a modest projection.

Actually, I believe we can do even better. My goal will be spending reductions of 10 percent by fiscal year 1984.

I will appoint men and women in key positions who share my belief that it is the government and not the people that must cut back in spending. And I will work with citizens task forces that will examine every department and agency.

This strategy for spending control does not require slashing necessary programs. To the contrary, I will defend the integrity of the Social Security system and work to improve those programs which provide for the disadvantaged and those in need.

The second major element of my economic program is a tax rate reduction plan. This plan calls for an across-the-board 10 percent reduction in personal income tax rates in each of the next three years. After that, we will index tax rates so that inflation doesnt force taxpayers into higher tax brackets.

Jimmy Carter says this cant be done. In fact, he says it shouldnt be done. He favors the current crushing tax burden because it fits into his philosophy of government as the dominating force in American economic life.

Official projections of the Congressional Budget Office show that by fiscal year 1985, if the current rates of taxation are still in effect, federal tax revenues will rise to over one trillion dollars a year. In 1981, the increase will take $86 billion more than government took this year.

The President says my proposed reduction of tax rates would be inflationary. Well, let me ask him a simple question in economics. Why is it inflationary if you keep more of your earnings and spend them the way you want to, but it isnt inflationary if he takes them and spends them the way he wants to?

The fact is this program will give us a balanced budget by 1983, and possibly by 1982.

We also need faster, less complex depreciation schedules for business. Outdated depreciation schedules now prevent many industries from modernizing their plants. Faster depreciation would allow these companies to generate more capital internally, permitting them to make the investment necessary to create new jobs, to help workers become more productive, and to become more competitive in world markets.

Another vital part of this strategy concerns government regulations which work against rather than for the interests of the people. No one argues with the intent of regulations dealing with health, safety, and clean air and water. But we must carefully re-examine our regulatory structure to assess to what degree regulations have cost jobs and economic growth. There should and will be a thorough and systematic review of the thousands of federal regulations that affect the economy.

Along with spending control, tax reform, and deregulations, a sound, stable, and predictable monetary policy is essential to restoring economic health. The Federal Reserve Board is, and should remain, independent of the Executive Branch of government. But the President must nominate those who serve on the Federal Reserve Board. My appointees would share my commitment to restoring the value and stability of the American dollar.

The federal government can also take a greater rode in promoting American exports. I have suggested that we revise Export-Import Bank rules to assist in the export of automobiles. The government should also work to break down foreign barriers to our exports.

We must also revitalize American industry by exploring areas of patent law reform which would encourage increased innovation and inventing.

Finally, we must adopt an energy policy which will enhance our economic growth. We must implement a balanced energy program that will encourage prudent energy conservation, along with increased domestic energy production.

As soon as possible, we must end federal price, production, and allocation controls, which have discouraged energy production, and accelerate the leasing of federal lands. When fiscally possible, we must remedy the disincentive effects of the so-called windfall profits tax. Finally, we should streamline and reform regulations which block the use of coal and safe nuclear power, and we should encourage the development of alternative fuels, such as solar and biomass.

Finally, let me say something about one part of the American economic life that represents what I mean by a humane economythe American home. Your home transcends mere economics. It is part of your life, not just a part of the economy.

The peopleespecially the young peopleof this country should not have to suffer a continued housing crisis. An administration committed to a housing policy that puts workers back to work, lenders back to making home loans, and young couples and all the people of this country into better housingthat kind of administration can turn the housing picture around.

As soon as fiscally possible, I will ask Congress to increase the amount of savings account income exempt from taxation, to encourage Americans to increase their savings and generate new capital for home loans.

And well explore some new ways of financing housing, and of stimulating housing rehabilitation in the neighborhoods of our large cities.

All of these specific steps, taken together, make up a comprehensive strategy. Instead of the on-again and off-again policies of Mr. Carter, I think we must have one coherent program that we can stick with.

Thus, what I am proposing is a strategy which encompasses many elementsnone of which can do the job alone, but all of which together can get it done.

This strategy would depend on the will of the people to regain control of their government.

Throughout this campaign, Ive been saying that the economy concerns more than mere statisticsit concerns people, families, human hopes, and human suffering.

Each American family has its own story about what the Carter economy has done. But the other day I came across a story that sums up what the American people have been through. The story is all the more poignant because it concerns a childs disappointment.

It appeared in the Fort Wayne, Indiana, News-Sentinel and concerns a Fort Wayne fifth grader named Andrea Baden who wanted to buy a pair of roller skates. So, in the great American tradition, she saved her allowance until she had the money to buy them.

Andrea put it this way: When I went back to the store the price had gone up. I saved more money but when I got back again, the price had gone up again. Its just not fair.

Thats right, Andrea: What Mr. Carter has done to this countrys economy just isnt fair. It just isnt right.

But Andrea has learned something as a fifth grader that Mr. Carter seems to have forgotten or not to have learned at all: inflation hurts people. It hurts when you want to buy a pair of roller skatesand it hurts when adults have to buy food and pay for heating and other necessities. It hurts older Americans who suffer unimaginably from what inflation does to the fixed incomes. And unemployment hurts even more.

This election is going to determine what kind of country Andrea Baden and millions of other American children are going to grow up in. Will it be a country in which everything keeps on going up in price, and jobs are harder to find and keep? Or will it be a country where, because of our efforts, beginning in January of 1981, savings will mean something, prices will be stable, and there will be jobs for people who want to work?

I would like very much to do something about that lack of fairness to hard-working Americans and, Andrea, to thrifty Americans like you.

I need your help, your support, and your prayers. But first of all, I need your commitment, your hope, and your belief in this great nations ability to begin again.

It just hasnt been fair or easy for any of us for the past four years.

I think the time has come for fair play for Americans. If you agree, together we can have a new beginning, for ourselves and for our children.

Thank you and good night.

#
#1980 Ronald Reagan/Jimmy Carter Presidential Debate
#


I'm Ruth Hinerfeld of the League of Women Voters Education Fund. Next Tuesday is election day. Before going to the polls, voters want to understand the issues and know the candidates' positions. Tonight, voters will have an opportunity to see and hear the major party candidates for the Presidency state their views on issues that affect us all. The League of Women Voters is proud to present this Presidential debate.

Our moderator is Howard K. Smith.

MR. SMITH. Thank you, Mrs. Hinerfeld.

The League of Women Voters is pleased to welcome to the Cleveland, Ohio, Convention Center Music Hall President Jimmy Carter, the Democratic Party's candidate for reelection to the Presidency, and Governor Ronald Reagan of California, the Republican Party's candidate for the Presidency. The candidates will debate questions on domestic, economic, foreign policy, and national security issues.

The questions are going to be posed by a panel of distinguished journalists who are here with me. They are: Marvin Stone, the editor of U.S. News and World Report; Harry Ellis, national correspondent of the Christian Science Monitor; William Hilliard, assistant managing editor of the Portland Oregonian; Barbara Walters, correspondent, ABC News.

The ground rules for this, as agreed by you gentlemen, are these: Each panelist down here will ask a question, the same question, to each of the two candidates. After the two candidates have answered, a panelist will ask followup questions to try to sharpen the answers. The candidates will then have an opportunity each to make a rebuttal. That will constitute the first half of the debate, and I will state the rules for the second half later on.

Some other rules: The candidates are not permitted to bring prepared notes to the podium, but are permitted to make notes during the debate. If the candidates exceed the allotted time agreed on, I will reluctantly but certainly interrupt. We ask the Convention Center audience here to abide by one ground rule: Please do not applaud or express approval or disapproval during the debate.

Now, based on a toss of the coin, Governor Reagan will respond to the first question from Marvin Stone.

QUESTIONS
U.S. ARMED FORCES
MR. STONE. Governor, as you're well aware, the question of war and peace has emerged as a central issue in this campaign in the give-and-take of recent weeks. President Carter's been criticized for responding late to aggressive Soviet impulses, for insufficient buildup of our Armed Forces, and a paralysis in dealing with Afghanistan and Iran. You have been criticized for being all too quick to advocate the use of lots of muscle, military action, to deal with foreign crises. Specifically, what are the differences between the two of you on the uses of American military power?

GOVERNOR REAGAN. I don't know what the differences might be, because I don't know what Mr. Carter's policies are. I do know what he has said about mine. And I'm only here to tell you that I believe with all my heart that our first priority must be world peace, and that use of force is always and only a last resort, when everything else has failed, and then only with regard to our national security.

Now, I believe, also that this meeting, this mission, this responsibility for preserving the peace, which I believe is a responsibility peculiar to our country, that we cannot shirk our responsibility as the leader of the Free World, because we're the only one that can do it. And therefore, the burden of maintaining the peace falls on us. And to maintain that peace requires strength. America has never gotten in a war because we were too strong. We can get into a war by letting events get out of hand, as they have in the last 3 years under the foreign policies of this administration of Mr. Carter's, until we're faced each time with a crisis. And good management in preserving the peace requires that we control the events and try to intercept before they become a crisis.

But I have seen four wars in my lifetime. I'm a father of sons; I have a grandson. I don't ever want to see another generation of young Americans bleed their lives into sandy beachheads in the Pacific, or rice paddies and jungles in Asia, or the muddy, bloody battlefields of Europe.

MR. SMITH. Mr. Stone, do you have a followup question for the Governor?

MR. STONE. Yes. Governor, we've been hearing that the defense buildup that you would associate yourself with would cost tens of billions of dollars more than is now contemplated. In assuming that the American people are ready to bear this cost, they nevertheless keep asking the following question: How do you reconcile huge increases in military outlays with your promise of substantial tax cuts and of balancing the budget, which in this fiscal year, the one that just ended, ran more than $60 billion in the red?

GOVERNOR REAGAN. Mr. Stone, I have submitted an economic plan that I've worked out in concert with a number of fine economists in this country, all of whom approve it, and believe that over a 5-year projection, this plan can permit the extra spending for needed refurbishing of our defensive posture, that it can provide for a balanced budget by 1983, if not earlier, and that we can afford-along with the cuts that I have proposed in Government spending--we can afford the tax cuts I have proposed--and probably, mainly because Mr. Carter's economic policy has built into the next 5 years, and on beyond that, a tax increase that will be taking $86 billion more next year out of the people's pockets than was taken this year. And my tax cut does not come close to eliminating that $86 billion increase. I'm only reducing the amount of the increase.

In other words, what I'm talking about is not putting Government back to getting less money than Government's been getting, but simply cutting the increase in spending.

MR. SMITH. The same question now goes to President Carter. President Carter, would you like to have the question repeated?
THE PRESIDENT. Yes.

MR. STONE. Yes, President Carter, the question of war and peace, a central issue in this campaign. You've been criticized in the give-and-take for responding late to aggressive Soviet impulses, for an insufficient buildup of our Armed Forces, and a paralysis in dealing with Afghanistan and Iran. Governor Reagan, on the other hand, has been criticized for being all too quick to advocate the use of lots of muscle, military action, to deal with foreign crises such as I mentioned. Specifically, what are the differences between the two of you on the uses of American military power?

THE PRESIDENT. Mr. Stone, I've had to make thousands of decisions since I've been President, serving in the Oval Office. And with each one of those decisions that affect the future of my country, I have learned in the process. I think I'm a much wiser and more experienced man than I was when I debated 4 years ago against President Ford. I've also learned that there are no simple answers to complicated questions. H. L. Mencken said that for every problem there's a simple answer. It would be neat and plausible--and wrong.

The fact is that this Nation, in the 8 years before I became President, had its own military strength decreased. Seven out of eight years, the budget commitments for defense went down, 37 percent, in all. Since I've been in office, we've had a steady, carefully planned, methodical but very effective increase in our commitment for defense.

But what we've done is to use that enormous power and prestige and military strength of the United States to preserve the peace. We've not only kept peace for our own country, but we've been able to extend the benefits of peace to others. In the Middle East, we've worked for a peace treaty between Israel and Egypt, successfully, and have tied ourselves together with Israel and Egypt in a common defense capability. This is a very good step forward for our Nation's security, and we'll continue to do as we've done in the past.

I might also add that there are decisions that are made in the Oval Office by every President which are profound in nature. There are always troublespots in the world, and how those troubled areas are addressed by a President, alone in that Oval Office, affects our Nation directly, the involvement of the United States and also our American interests. That is a basic decision that has to be made so frequently by every President who serves. That's what I've tried to do, successfully, by keeping our country at peace.

MR. SMITH. Mr. Stone, do you have a followup on---

MR. STONE. Yes. I would like to be a little more specific on the use of military power, and let's talk about one area for a moment.

Under what circumstances would you use military forces to deal with, for example, a shutoff of Persian Oil Gulf, if that should occur, or to counter Russian expansion beyond Afghanistan into either Iran or Pakistan? I ask this question in view of charges that we are woefully unprepared to project sustained--and I emphasize the word "sustained"--power in that part of the world.

THE PRESIDENT. Mr. Stone, in my State of the Union address earlier this year, I pointed out that any threat to the stability or security of the Persian Gulf would be a threat to the security of our own country. In the past, we've not had an adequate military presence in that region. Now we have two major carrier task forces. We have access to facilities in five different areas of that region. And we've made it clear that working with our allies and others, that we are prepared to address any foreseeable eventuality which might interrupt commerce with that crucial area of the world.

But in doing this, we have made sure that we address this question peacefully, not injecting American military forces into combat, but letting the strength of our Nation be felt in a beneficial way. This, I believe, has assured that our interests will be protected in the Persian Gulf region, as we've done in the Middle East and throughout the world.

MR. SMITH. Governor Reagan, you have a minute to comment or rebut.

GOVERNOR REAGAN. Well, yes, I question the figure about the decline in defense spending under the two previous administrations, in the preceding 8 years to this administration. I would call to your attention that we were in a war that wound down during those 8 years, which of course made a change in military spending because of turning from war to peace. I also would like to point out that Republican Presidents in those years, faced with a Democratic majority in both Houses of the Congress, found that their requests for defense budgets were very often cut.

Now, Gerald Ford left a 5-year projected plan for a military buildup to restore our defenses, and President Carter's administration reduced that by 38 percent, cut 60 ships out of the Navy building program that had been proposed, and stopped the B-1, delayed the cruise missile, stopped the production line for the Minuteman missiles, delayed the Trident submarine, and now is planning a mobile military force that can be delivered to various spots in the world--which does make me question his assaults on whether I am the one that is quick to look for use of force.

MR. SMITH. President Carter, you have the last word on this question.

THE PRESIDENT. Well, there are various elements of defense. One is to control nuclear weapons, which I hope we'll get to later on, because that's the most important single issue in this campaign. Another one is how to address troubled areas of the world. I think, habitually, Governor Reagan has advocated the injection of military forces into troubled areas, when I and my predecessors both Democrats and Republicans--have advocated resolving those troubles and those difficult areas of the world peacefully, diplomatically, and through negotiation.

In addition to that, the buildup of military forces is good for our country, because we've got to have military strength in order to preserve the peace. But I'll always remember that the best weapons are the ones that are never fired in combat, and the best soldier is one who never has to lay his life down on the field of battle. Strength is imperative for peace, but the two must go hand in hand.

MR. SMITH. Thank you, gentlemen. The next question is from Harry Ellis to President Carter.

THE NATION'S ECONOMY
MR. ELLIS. Mr. President, when you were elected in 1976, the Consumer Price Index stood at 4.8 percent. It now stands at more than 12 percent. Perhaps more significantly, the Nation's broader, underlying inflation rate has gone up from 7 to 9 percent. Now, a part of that was due to external factors beyond U.S. control, notably the more than doubling of oil prices by OPEC last year.

Because the United States remains vulnerable to such external shocks, can inflation in fact be controlled? If so, what measures would you pursue in a second term?

THE PRESIDENT. Again it's important to put the situation into perspective. In 1974 we had a so-called oil shock, wherein the price of OPEC oil was raised to an extraordinary degree. We had an even worse oil shock in 1979. In 1974 we had the worst recession, the deepest and most penetrating recession since the Second World War. The recession that resulted this time was the briefest we've had since the Second World War.

In addition, we've brought down inflation. Earlier this year, the first quarter, we did have a very severe inflation pressure, brought about by the OPEC price increase. It averaged about 18 percent the first quarter of this year. The second quarter, we had dropped it down to about 13 percent. The most recent figures, the last 3 months, or the third quarter of this year, the inflation rate is 7 percent--still too high, but it illustrates very vividly that in addition to providing an enormous number of jobs--9 million new jobs in the last 3 1/2 years--that the inflationary threat is still urgent on us.

I noticed that Governor Reagan recently mentioned the Reagan-Kemp-Roth proposal, which his own running mate, George Bush, described as voodoo economics, and said that it would result in a 30-percent inflation rate. And Business Week, which is not a Democratic publication, said that this Reagan-Kemp-Roth proposal--and I quote them, I think-was completely irresponsible and would result in inflationary pressures which would destroy this Nation.

So, our proposals are very sound and very carefully considered to stimulate jobs, to improve the industrial complex of this country, to create tools for American workers, and at the same time would be anti-inflationary in nature. So, to add 9 million new jobs, to control inflation, and to plan for the future with the energy policy now intact as a foundation is our plan for the years ahead.

MR. SMITH. Mr. Ellis, do you have a followup question for Mr. Carter?

MR. ELLIS. Yes, Mr. President. You have mentioned the creation of 9 million new jobs.
THE PRESIDENT. Yes.

MR. ELLIS. At the same time, the unemployment rate still hangs high, as does the inflation rate. Now, I wonder, can you tell us what additional policies you would pursue in a second administration in order to try to bring down that inflation rate? And would it be an act of leadership to tell the American people they're going to have to sacrifice to adopt a leaner lifestyle for some time to come?

THE PRESIDENT. Yes. We have demanded that the American people sacrifice, and they've done very well. As a matter of fact, we're importing today about one-third less oil from overseas than we did just a year ago. We've had a 25-percent reduction since the first year I was in office. At the same time, as I said earlier, we have added about 9 million net new jobs in that period of time--a record never before achieved.

Also, the new energy policy has been predicated on two factors: One, conservation, which requires sacrifice, and the other one, increase in production of American energy, which is going along very well--more coal this year than ever before in history, more oil and gas wells drilled this year than ever before in history.

The new economic revitalization program that we have in mind, which will be implemented next year, would result in tax credits which would let business invest in new tools and new factories to create even more new jobs--about a million in the next 2 years. And we also have planned a youth employment program which would encompass 600,000 jobs for young people. This has already passed the House; now has an excellent prospect to pass the Senate.

MR. SMITH. Now, the same question goes to Governor Reagan. Governor Reagan, would you like to have the question repeated?
GOVERNOR REAGAN. Yes, please.

MR. ELLIS. Governor Reagan, during the past 4 years, the Consumer Price Index has risen from 4.8 percent to currently over 12 percent. And perhaps more significantly, the Nation's broader, underlying rate of inflation has gone up from 7 to 9 percent. Now, a part of that has been due to external factors beyond U.S. control, and notably, the more than doubling of OPEC oil prices last year, which leads me to ask you whether, since the United States remains vulnerable to such external shocks, can inflation in fact be controlled? If so, specifically what measures would you pursue?

GOVERNOR REAGAN. Mr. Ellis, I think this idea that has been spawned here in our country, that inflation somehow came upon us like a plague and therefore it's uncontrollable and no one can do anything about it, is entirely spurious, and it's dangerous to say this to the people. When Mr. Carter became President, inflation was 4.8 percent, as you said. It had been cut in two by President Gerald Ford. It is now running at 12.7 percent.

President Carter also has spoken of the new jobs created. Well, we always, with the normal growth in our country and increase in population, increase the number of jobs. But that can't hide the fact that there are 8 million men and women out of work in America today, and 2 million of those lost their jobs in just the last few months. Mr. Carter had also promised that he would not use unemployment as a tool to fight against inflation. And yet, his 1980 economic message stated that we would reduce productivity and gross national product and increase unemployment in order to get a handle on inflation, because in January, at the beginning of the year, it was more than 18 percent.

Since then, he has blamed to the people for inflation, OPEC, he's blamed the Federal Reserve System, he has blamed the lack of productivity of the American people, he has then accused the people of living too well and that we must share in scarcity, we must sacrifice and get used to doing with less. We don't have inflation because the people are living too well. We have inflation because the Government is living too well.

And the last statement, just a few days ago, was a speech to the effect that we have inflation because Government revenues have not kept pace with Government spending. I see my time is running out here. I'll have to get this down very fast.

Yes, you can lick inflation by increasing productivity and by decreasing the cost of Government to the place that we have balanced budgets and are no longer grinding out printing press money, flooding the market with it because the Government is spending more than it takes in. And my economic plan calls for that.

The President's economic plan calls for increasing the taxes to the point that we finally take so much money away from the people that we can balance the budget in that way. But we'll have a very poor nation and a very unsound economy if we follow that path.

MR. SMITH. A followup, Mr. Ellis?

MR. ELLIS. Yes, you have centered on cutting Government spending in what you have just said about your own policies. You have also said that you would increase defense spending. Specifically, where would you cut Government spending if you were to increase defense spending and also cut taxes, so that, presumably, Federal revenues would shrink?

GOVERNOR REAGAN. Well, most people, when they think about cutting Government spending, they think in terms of eliminating necessary programs or wiping out something, some service that Government is supposed to perform. I believe that there is enough extravagance and fat in Government. As a matter of fact, one of the Secretaries of HEW under Mr. Carter testified that he thought there was $7 billion worth of fraud and waste in welfare and in the medical programs associated with it. We've had the General Accounting Office estimate that there is probably tens of billions of dollars that is lost in fraud alone, and they have added that waste adds even more to that.

We have a program for a gradual reduction of Government spending based on these theories, and I have a task force now that has been working on where those cuts could be made. I'm confident that it can be done and that it will reduce inflation, because I did it in California. And inflation went down below the national average in California when we returned money to the people and reduced government spending.
MR. SMITH. President Carter.

THE PRESIDENT. Governor Reagan's proposal, the Reagan-Kemp-Roth proposal, is one of the most highly inflationary ideas that ever has been presented to the American public. He would actually have to cut Government spending by at least $130 billion in order to balance the budget under this ridiculous proposal.

I noticed that his task force that's working for his future plans had some of their ideas revealed in the Wall Street Journal this week. One of those ideas was to repeal the minimum wage, and several times this year, Governor Reagan has said that the major cause of unemployment is the minimum wage. This is a heartless kind of approach to the working families of our country which is typical of many Republican leaders in the past, but I think has been accentuated under Governor Reagan.

In California--I'm surprised Governor Reagan brought this up--he had the three largest tax increases in the history of that State under his administration. He more than doubled State spending while he was Governor--122-percent increase--and had between a 20- and 30-percent increase in the number of employees---

MR. SMITH. Sorry to interrupt---

THE PRESIDENT.---in California.

MR. SMITH.---Mr. Carter.

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you, sir.

MR. SMITH. Governor Reagan has the last word on this question.

GOVERNOR REAGAN. Yes. The figures that the President has just used about California is a distortion of the situation there, because while I was Governor of California, our spending in California increased less per capita than the spending in Georgia while Mr. Carter was Governor of Georgia in the same 4 years. The size of government increased only onesixth in California of what it increased in proportion to population in Georgia.

And the idea that my tax-cut proposal is inflationary: I would like to ask the President, why is it inflationary to let the people keep more of their money and spend it the way they'd like, and it isn't inflationary to let him take that money and spend it the way he wants?

MR. SMITH. I wish that question need not be rhetorical, but it must be because we've run out of time on that. [Laughter] Now, the third question to Governor Reagan from William Hilliard.

URBAN POLICIES


MR. HILLIARD. Yes, Governor Reagan, the decline of our cities has been hastened by the continual rise in crime, strained race relations, the fall in the quality of public education, the persistence of abnormal poverty in a rich nation, and a decline in the services to the public. The signs seem to point toward a deterioration that could lead to the establishment of a permanent underclass in the cities. What, specifically, would you do in the next 4 years to reverse this trend?

GOVERNOR REAGAN. I have been talking to a number of Congressmen who have much the same idea that I have, and that is that in the inner-city areas, that in cooperation with local government and with National Government, and using tax incentives and with cooperation with the private sector, that we have development zones. Let the local entity, the city, declare this particular area, based on the standards of the percentage of people on welfare, unemployed, and so forth, in that area. And then, through tax incentives, induce the creation of businesses providing jobs and so forth in those areas.

The elements of government through these tax incentives for example, a business that would not have, for a period of time, an increase in the property tax reflecting its development of the unused property that it was making wouldn't be any loss to the city, because the city isn't getting any tax from that now. And there would simply be a delay, and on the other hand, many of the people that would then be given jobs are presently wards of the Government, and it wouldn't hurt to give them a tax incentive, because that wouldn't be costing Government anything either.

I think there are things to do in this regard. I stood in the South Bronx on the exact spot that President Carter stood on in 1977. You have to see it to believe it. It looks like a bombed-out city--great, gaunt skeletons of buildings, windows smashed out, painted on one of them "Unkept promises," on another, "Despair." And this was the spot at which President Carter had promised that he was going to bring in a vast program to rebuild this area. There are whole blocks of land that are left bare, just bulldozed down flat, and nothing has been done. And they are now charging to take tourists through there to see this terrible desolation.

I talked to a man just briefly there who asked me one simple question: "Do I have reason to hope that I can someday take care of my family again? Nothing has been done."
MR. SMITH. Follow-up, Mr. Hilliard?
MR. HILLIARD. Yes, Governor Reagan. Blacks and other nonwhites are increasing in numbers in our cities. Many of them feel that they are facing a hostility from whites that prevents them from joining the economic mainstream of our society. There is racial confrontation in the schools, on jobs, and in housing, as nonwhites seek to reap the benefits of a free society. What do you think is the Nation's future as a multiracial society?

GOVERNOR REAGAN. I believe in it. I am eternally optimistic, and I happen to believe that we've made great progress from the days when I was young and when this country didn't even know it had a racial problem. I know those things can grow out of despair in an inner city, when there's hopelessness at home, lack of work, and so forth. But I believe that all of us together--and I believe the Presidency is what Teddy Roosevelt said it was; it's a bully pulpit--and I think that something can be done from there, because the goal for all of us should be that one day, things will be done neither because of nor in spite of any of the differences between us--ethnic differences or racial differences, whatever they may be--that we will have total equal opportunity for all people. And I would do everything I could in my power to bring that about.

MR. SMITH. Mr. Hilliard, would you repeat your question for President Carter?

MR. HILLIARD. President Carter, the decline of our cities has been hastened by the continual rise in crime, strained race relations, the fall in the quality of public education, the persistence of abnormal poverty in a rich nation, and a decline in services to the public. The signs seem to point toward a deterioration that could lead to the establishment of a permanent underclass in the cities. What, specifically, would you do in the next 4 years to reverse this trend?

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you, Mr. Hilliard.

When I was campaigning in 1976, everywhere I went the mayors and local officials were in despair about the rapidly deteriorating central cities of our Nation. We initiated a very fine urban renewal program, working with the mayors, the Governors, and other interested officials. This has been a very successful effort. That's one of the main reasons that we've had such an increase in the number of people employed. Of the 9 million people put to work in new jobs since I've been in office, 1.3 million of those has been among black Americans and another million among those who speak Spanish.

We now are planning to continue the revitalization program with increased commitments of rapid transit, mass transit. Under the windfall profits tax, we expect to spend about $43 billion in the next 10 years to rebuild the transportation systems of our country. We also are pursuing housing programs. We've had a 73-percent increase in the allotment of Federal funds for improved education. These are the kinds of efforts worked on a joint basis with community leaders, particularly in the minority areas of the central cities that had been deteriorating so rapidly in the past.

It's very important to us that this be done with the full involvement of minority citizens. I've brought into the top levels of Government--into the White House, into administrative offices of the executive branch, into the judicial system--highly qualified black and Spanish citizens and women who in the past had been excluded.

I noticed that Governor Reagan said that when he was a younger man that there was no knowledge of a racial problem in this country. Those who suffered from discrimination because of race or sex certainly knew we had a racial problem. We have gone a long way toward correcting these problems, but we still have a long way to go.

MR. SMITH. A followup question?

MR. HILLIARD. Yes, President Carter, I'd like to repeat the same followup to you. Blacks and other nonwhites are increasing in numbers in our cities. Many of them feel that they are facing a hostility from whites that prevents them from joining the economic mainstream of our society. There is racial confrontation in the schools, on jobs, and in housing, as nonwhites seek to reap the benefits of a free society. What is your assessment of the Nation's future in a multiracial society?

THE PRESIDENT. Ours is a nation of refugees, a nation of immigrants. Almost all of our citizens came here from other lands and now have hopes, which are being realized, for a better life, preserving their ethnic commitments, their family structures, their religious beliefs, preserving their relationships with their relatives in foreign countries, but still forming themselves together in a very coherent society, which gives our Nation its strength.

In the past, those minority groups have often been excluded from participation in the affairs of government. Since I've been President, I've appointed, for instance, more than twice as many black Federal judges as all previous Presidents in the history of this country. I've done the same thing in the appointment of women, and also Spanish-speaking Americans. To involve them in administration of government and a feeling that they belong to the societal structure that makes decisions in the judiciary and in executive branch is a very important commitment which I am trying to realize and will continue to do so in the future.

MR. SMITH. Governor Reagan, you have a minute for rebuttal.

GOVERNOR REAGAN. Yes. The President talks of Government programs, and they have their place. But as Governor, when I was at that end of the line and receiving some of these grants for Government programs, I saw that so many of them were dead-end. They were public employment for these people who really want to get out into the private job market, where there are jobs with a future.

Now, the President spoke a moment ago about--that I was against the minimum wage. I wish he could have been with me when I sat with a group of teenagers who were black and who were telling me about their unemployment problems, and that it was the minimum wage that had done away with the jobs that they once could get. And indeed, every time it has increased you will find there is an increase in minority unemployment among young people. And therefore, I have been in favor of a separate minimum for them.

With regard to the great progress that has been made with this Government spending, the rate of black unemployment in Detroit, Michigan, is 56 percent.

MR. SMITH. President Carter, you have the last word on this question.

THE PRESIDENT. Well, it's obvious that we still have a long way to go in fully incorporating the minority groups into the mainstream of American life. We have made good progress, and there's no doubt in my mind that the commitment to unemployment compensation, the minimum wage, welfare, national health insurance, those kinds of commitments that have typified the Democratic Party since ancient history in this country's political life are a very important element of the future. In all those elements, Governor Reagan has repeatedly spoken out against them, which, to me, shows a very great insensitivity to giving deprived families a better chance in life. This, to me, is a very important difference between him and me in this election, and I believe the American people will judge accordingly.

There is no doubt in my mind that in the downtown, central cities, with the new commitment on an energy policy, with a chance to revitalize homes and to make them more fuel-efficient, with a chance for a synthetic fuels program, solar power, this will give us an additional opportunity for jobs which will pay rich dividends.

MR. SMITH. Thank you, gentlemen.

Now for the fourth question, to President Carter from Barbara Walters.

INTERNATIONAL TERRORISM

MS. WALTERS. Mr. President, the eyes of the country tonight are on the hostages in Iran. I realize this is a sensitive area, but the question of how we respond to acts of terrorism goes beyond this current crisis. Other countries have policies that determine how they will respond. Israel, for example, considers hostages like soldiers and will not negotiate with terrorists.

For the future, Mr. President, the country has the right to know, do you have a policy for dealing with terrorism wherever it might happen, and what have we learned from this experience in Iran that might cause us to do things differently if this or something similar happens again?

THE PRESIDENT. Barbara, one of the blights on this world is the threat and the activities of terrorists. At one of the recent economic summit conferences between myself and the other leaders of the We. stern world, we committed ourselves to take strong action against terrorism. Airplane hijacking was one of the elements of that commitment. There is no doubt that we have seen in recent years, in recent months, additional acts of violence against Jews in France and, of course, against those who live in Israel by the PLO and other terrorist organizations.

Ultimately, the most serious terrorist threat is if one of those radical nations, who believe in terrorism as a policy, should have atomic weapons. Both I and all my predecessors have had a deep commitment to controlling the proliferation of nuclear weapons in countries like Libya or Iraq. We have even alienated some of our closest trade partners, because we have insisted upon the control of the spread of nuclear weapons to those potentially terrorist countries.

When Governor Reagan has been asked about that, he makes a very disturbing comment that nonproliferation, or the control of the spread of nuclear weapons, is none of our business. And when he was asked specifically, recently, about Iraq, he said there's nothing we can do about it.

This ultimate terrorist threat is the most fearsome of all, and it's part of a pattern where our country must stand firm to control terrorism of all kinds.

MR. SMITH. Ms. Walters, a followup?

MS. WALTERS. Yes. While we are discussing policy, had Iran not taken American hostages, I assume that, in order to preserve our neutrality, we would have stopped the flow of spare parts and vital war materiels once war broke out between Iraq and Iran. Now, we're offering to lift the ban on such goods if they let our people come home. Doesn't this reward terrorism, compromise our neutrality, and possibly antagonize nations now friendly to us in the Middle East?

THE PRESIDENT. We will maintain our position of neutrality in the Iran and Iraq war. We have no plans to sell additional materiel or goods to Iran that might be of a warlike nature. When I made my decision to stop all trade with Iran as a result of the taking of our hostages, I announced then and have consistently maintained since then that if the hostages are released safely, that we would make delivery on those items which Iran owns, which they have bought and paid for-also, that the frozen Iranian assets would be released. That's been a consistent policy, one I intend to carry out.

MR. SMITH. Would you repeat the question now for Governor Reagan, please, Ms. Walters?

MS. WALTERS. Yes. Governor, the eyes of the country tonight remain on the hostages in Iran, but the question of how we respond to acts of terrorism goes beyond this current crisis. There are other countries that have policies that determine how they will respond. Israel, for example, considers hostages like soldiers and will not negotiate with terrorists.

For the future, the country has the right to know, do you have a policy for dealing with terrorism wherever it might happen, and what have we learned from this experience in Iran that might cause us to do things differently if this, or something similar, should happen again?

GOVERNOR REAGAN. Well, Barbara, you've asked that question twice. I think you ought to have at least one answer to it. [Laughter]

I have been accused lately of having a secret plan with regard to the hostages. Now, this comes from an answer that I've made at least 50 times during this campaign to the press. The question would be, "Have you any ideas of what you would do if you were there?" And I said, well, yes. And I think that anyone that's seeking this position, as well as other people, probably, have thought to themselves, "What about this, what about that?" These are just ideas of what I would think of if I were in that position and had access to the information, in which I would know all the options that were open to me. I have never answered the question, however. Second--the one that says, "Well, tell me, what are some of those ideas?" First of all, I would be fearful that I might say something that was presently under way or in negotiations, and thus expose it and endanger the hostages. And sometimes, I think some of my ideas might involve quiet diplomacy, where you don't say in advance or say to anyone what it is you're thinking of doing.

Your question is difficult to answer, because, in the situation right now, no one wants to say anything that would inadvertently delay, in any way, the return of those hostages if there is a chance of their coming home soon, or that might cause them harm.

What I do think should be done, once they are safely here with their families and that tragedy is over--and we've endured this humiliation for just lacking 1 week of a year now--then, I think, it is time for us to have a complete investigation as to the diplomatic efforts that were made in the beginning, why they have been there so long, and when they come home, what did we have to do in order to bring that about, what arrangements were made? And I would suggest that Congress should hold such an investigation.

In the meantime, I'm going to continue praying that they'll come home.

MR. SMITH. Follow-up question.

MS. WALTERS. Well, I would like to say that neither candidate answered specifically the question of a specific policy for dealing with terrorism, but I will ask Governor Reagan a different followup question. You have suggested that there would be no Iranian crisis had you been President, because we would have given firmer support to the Shah. But Iran is a country of 37 million people who were resisting a government they regarded as dictatorial.

My question is not whether the Shah's regime was preferable to the Ayatollah's, but whether the United States has the power or the right to try to determine what form of government any country will have, and do we back unpopular regimes whose major merit is that they are friendly to the United States?


GOVERNOR REAGAN. The degree of unpopularity of a regime when the choice is total authoritarianism--totalitarianism, I should say, in the alternative government, makes one wonder whether you are being helpful to the people. And we've been guilty of that. Because someone didn't meet exactly our standards of human rights, even though they were an ally of ours, instead of trying patiently to persuade them to change their ways, we have, in a number of instances, aided a revolutionary overthrow which results in complete totalitarianism, instead, for those people. And I think that this is a kind of a hypocritical policy when, at the same time, we're maintaining a detente with the one nation in the world where there are no human rights at all--the Soviet Union.

Now, there was a second phase in the Iranian affair in which we had something to do with that. And that was, we had adequate warning that there was a threat to our Embassy, and we could have done what other Embassies did--either strengthen our security there or remove our personnel before the kidnap and the takeover took place.

MR. SMITH. Governor, I'm sorry, I must interrupt. President Carter, you have a minute for rebuttal.

THE PRESIDENT. I didn't hear any comment from Governor Reagan about what he would do to stop or to reduce terrorism in the future. What the Western allies did decide to do is to stop all air flights-commercial air flights--to any nation involved in terrorism or the hijacking of airplanes, or the harboring of hijackers. Secondly, we all committed ourselves, as have all my predecessors in the Oval Office, not to permit the spread of nuclear weapons to a terrorist nation or to any other nation that does not presently have those weapons or capabilities for explosives. Third, not to make any sales of materiel or weapons to a nation which is involved in terrorist activities. And, lastly, not to deal with the PLO until and unless the PLO recognizes Israel's right to exist and recognizes U.N. Resolution 242 as a basis for a Middle East peace.

These are a few of the things to which our Nation is committed, and we will continue with these commitments.

MR. SMITH. Governor Reagan, you have the last word on that question.
 

GOVERNOR REAGAN. Yes. I have no quarrel whatsoever with the things that have been done, because I believe it is high time that the civilized countries of the world made it plain that there is no room worldwide for terrorism; there will be no negotiation with terrorists of any kind. And while I have a last word here, I would like to correct a misstatement of fact by the President. I have never made the statement that he suggested about nuclear proliferation, and nuclear proliferation, or the trying to halt it, would be a major part of a foreign policy of mine.

MR. SMITH. Thank you, gentlemen. That is the first half of the debate.

Now, the rules for the second half, quite simple. They're only complicated when I explain them. [Laughter] In the second half, the panelists with me will have no followup questions. Instead, after the panelists have asked a question the candidates have answered, each of the candidates will have two opportunities to follow up, to question, to rebut, or just to comment on his opponent's statement.

Governor Reagan will respond, in this section, to the first question from Marvin Stone.

STRATEGIC ARMS LIMITATION

MR. STONE. Governor Reagan, arms control: The President said it was the single most important issue, Both of you have expressed the desire to end the nuclear arms race with Russia, but by methods that are vastly different. You suggest that we scrap the SALT II treaty, already negotiated, and intensify the buildup of American power to induce the Soviets to sign a new treaty, one more favorable to us.
GOVERNOR REAGAN. Yes.

MR. STONE. President Carter, on the other hand, says he will again try to convince a reluctant Congress to ratify the present treaty on the grounds it's the best we can hope to get.

Now, both of you cannot be right. Will you tell us why you think you are?

GOVERNOR REAGAN. Yes. I think I'm right, because I believe that we must have a consistent foreign policy, a strong America, and a strong economy. And then, as we build up our national security, to restore our margin of safety, we at the same time try to restrain the Soviet buildup, which has been going forward at a rapid pace and for quite some time.

The SALT II treaty was the result of negotiations that Mr. Carter's team entered into after he had asked the Soviet Union for a discussion of actual reduction of nuclear strategic weapons, and his emissary, I think, came home in 12 hours having heard a very definite yet. But taking that one no from the Soviet Union, we then went back into negotiations on their terms, because Mr. Carter had canceled the B-1 bomber, delayed the MX, delayed the Trident submarine, delayed the cruise missile, shut down the Minuteman missile production line, and whatever other things that might have been done. The Soviet Union sat at the table knowing that we had gone forward with unilateral concessions without any reciprocation from them whatsoever.

Now, I have not blocked the SALT II treaty, as Mr. Carter and Mr. Mondale suggest that I have. It has been blocked by a Senate in which there is a Democratic majority. Indeed, the Senate Armed Services Committee voted 10 to 0, with 7 abstentions, against the SALT II treaty, and declared that it was not in the national security interests of the United States-besides which, it is illegal, because the law of the land, passed by Congress, says we cannot accept a treaty in which we are not equal. And we're not equal in this treaty for one reason alone: Our B-52 bombers are considered to be strategic weapons; their Backfire bombers are not.

MR. SMITH. Governor, I have to interrupt you at that point. The time is up for that. But the same question now to President Carter.

MR. STONE. Yes, President Carter. Both of you have expressed the desire to end the nuclear arms race with Russia, but through vastly different methods. The Governor suggests we scrap the SALT II treaty, which you signed in Vienna--intensify the buildup of American power to induce the Soviets to sign a new treaty, one more favorable to us. You, on the other hand, say you will again try to convince a reluctant Congress to ratify the present treaty on the grounds it is the best we can hope to get from the Russians.

You cannot both be right. Will you tell us why you think you are?

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, I'd be glad to. Inflation, unemployment, the cities-all very important issues, but they pale into insignificance in the life and duties of a President when compared with the control of nuclear weapons. Every President who has served in the Oval Office since Harry Truman has been dedicated to the proposition of controlling nuclear weapons, to negotiate with the Soviet Union--balanced, controlled, observable, and then reducing levels of atomic weaponry.

There is a disturbing pattern in the attitude of Governor Reagan. He has never supported any of those arms control agreements--the limited test ban, SALT I, nor the antiballistic missile treaty, nor the Vladivostok Treaty negotiated with the Soviet Union by President Ford--and now he wants to throw into the wastebasket a treaty to control nuclear weapons on a balanced and equal basis between ourselves and the Soviet Union, negotiated over a 7-year period, by myself and my two Republican predecessors.

The Senate has not voted yet on the strategic arms limitation treaty. There have been preliminary skirmishings in the committees of the Senate, but the treaty has never come to the floor of the Senate for either a debate or a vote. It's understandable that a Senator in the preliminary debates can make an irresponsible statement, or, maybe, an ill-advised statement. You've got 99 other Senators to correct that mistake, if it is a mistake. But when a man who hopes to be President says, "Take this treaty, discard it, do not vote, do not debate, do not explore the issues, do not finally capitalize on this long negotiation"--that is a very dangerous and disturbing thing.

MR. SMITH. Governor Reagan, you have an opportunity to rebut that.

GOVERNOR REAGAN. Yes, I'd like to respond very much.

First of all, the Soviet Union--if I have been critical of some of the previous agreements, it's because we've been outnegotiated for quite a long time. And they have managed, in spite of all of our attempts at arms limitation, to go forward with the biggest military buildup in the history of man.

Now, to suggest that because two Republican Presidents tried to pass the SALT treaty--that puts them on its side--I would like to say that President Ford, who was within 90 percent of a treaty that we could be in agreement with when he left office, is emphatically against this SALT treaty. I would like to point out also that Senators like Henry Jackson and Hollings of South Carolina--they are taking the lead in the fight against this particular treaty.

I am not talking of scrapping; I am talking of taking the treaty back and going back into negotiations. And I would say to the Soviet Union, we will sit and negotiate with you as long as it takes, to have not only legitimate arms limitation but to have a reduction of these nuclear weapons to the point that neither one of us represents a threat to the other. That is hardly throwing away a treaty and being opposed to arms limitation.
MR. SMITH. President Carter?

THE PRESIDENT. Yes. Governor Reagan is making some very misleading and disturbing statements. He not only advocates the scrapping of this treaty--and I don't know that these men that he quotes are against the treaty in its final form--but he also advocates the possibility-he said it's been a missing element-of playing a trump card against the Soviet Union of a nuclear arms race and insisting upon nuclear superiority by our own Nation as a predication for negotiation in the future with the Soviet Union.

If President Brezhnev said, "We will scrap this treaty, negotiated under three American presidents over a 7-year period of time; we insist upon nuclear superiority as a basis for future negotiations; and we believe that the launching of a nuclear arms race is a good basis for future negotiations," it's obvious that I, as President, and all Americans would reject such a proposition. This would mean the resumption of a very dangerous nuclear arms race.

It would be very disturbing to American people. It would change the basic tone and commitment that our Nation has experienced ever since the Second World War, with all Presidents, Democratic and Republican, and would also be very disturbing to our allies, all of whom support this nuclear arms treaty. In addition to that, the adversarial relationship between ourselves and the Soviet Union would undoubtedly deteriorate very rapidly.

This attitude is extremely dangerous and belligerent in its tone, although it's said with a quiet voice.

MR. SMITH. Governor Reagan?


GOVERNOR REAGAN. I know the President's supposed to be replying to me, but sometimes, I have a hard time in connecting what he's saying with what I have said or what my positions are. I sometimes think he's like the witch doctor that gets mad when a good doctor comes along with a cure that'll work.

My point I have made already, Mr. President, with regard to negotiating. It does not call for nuclear superiority on the part of the United States; it calls for a mutual reduction of these weapons, as I say, that neither of us can represent a threat to the other. And to suggest that the SALT II treaty that your negotiators negotiated was just a continuation, and based on all of the preceding efforts by two previous Presidents, is just not true. It was a new negotiation, because, as I say, President Ford was within about 10 percent of having a solution that could be acceptable. And I think our allies would be very happy to go along with a fair and verifiable SALT agreement.

MR. SMITH. President Carter, you have the last word on this question.

THE PRESIDENT. I think, to close out this discussion, it would be better to put into perspective what we're talking about.

I had a discussion with my daughter, Amy, the other day, before I came here, to ask her what the most important issue was. She said she thought nuclear weaponry and the control of nuclear arms.

This is a formidable force. Some of these weapons have 10 megatons of explosion. If you put 50 tons of TNT in each one of railroad cars, you would have a trainload of TNT stretching across this Nation. That's one major war explosion in a warhead. We have thousands, equivalent of megaton, or million tons, of TNT warheads. The control of these weapons is the single major responsibility of a President, and to cast out this commitment of all Presidents, because of some slight technicalities that can be corrected, is a very dangerous approach.

MR. SMITH. We have to go to another question now, from Harry Ellis to President Carter.

ENERGY


MR. ELLIS. Mr. President, as you have said, Americans, through conservation, are importing much less oil today than we were even a year ago. Yet U.S. dependence on Arab oil as a percentage of total imports is today much higher than it was at the time of the 1973 Arab oil embargo. And for some time to come, the loss of substantial amounts of Arab oil could plunge the U.S. into depression. Now, this means that a bridge must be built out of this dependence.

Can the United States develop synthetic fuels and other alternative energy sources without damage to the environment, and will this process mean steadily higher fuel bills for American families?
THE PRESIDENT. I don't think there's any doubt that, in the future, the cost of oil is going to go up. What I've had as a basic commitment since I've been President is to reduce our dependence on foreign oil: It can only be done in two ways: one, to conserve energy, to stop the waste of energy, and secondly, to produce more American energy.

We've been very successful in both cases. We've now reduced the importing of foreign oil in the last year alone by onethird. We imported today 2 million barrels of oil less than we did the same day just a year ago.

This commitment has been opening up a very bright vista for our Nation in the future, because with the windfall profits tax as a base, we now have an opportunity to use American technology and American ability and American natural resources to expand rapidly the production of synthetic fuels, yes; to expand rapidly the production of solar energy, yes; and also to produce the conventional kinds of American energy. We will drill more oil and gas wells this year than any year in history. We'll produce more coal this year than any year in history. We're exporting more coal this year than any year in history. And we have an opportunity now, with improved transportation systems and improved loading facilities in our ports, to see a very good opportunity on the world international market, to replace OPEC oil with American coal as a basic energy source.

This exciting future will not only give us more energy security but will also open up vast opportunities for Americans to live a better life and to have millions of new jobs associated with this new and very dynamic industry now in prospect because of the new energy policy that we've put into effect.

MR. SMITH. Would you repeat the question now for Governor Reagan?

MR. ELLIS. Governor Reagan, Americans, through conservation, are importing much less oil today than we were even a year ago. And yet, U.S. reliance on Arab oil as a percentage of total imports is much higher today than it was during the 1973 Arab oil embargo. And the substantial loss of Arab oil could plunge the United States into depression.

The question is whether the development of alternative energy sources, in order to reduce this dependence, can be done without damaging the environment, and will it mean for American families steadily higher fuel bills?

GOVERNOR REAGAN. I'm not sure that it means steadily higher fuel costs, but I do believe that this Nation has been portrayed for too long a time to the people as being energy-poor when it is energy-rich. The coal that the President mentioned: Yes, we have it, and yet one-eighth of our total coal resources is not being utilized at all right now. The mines are closed down; there are 22,000 miners out of work. Most of this is due to regulations which either interfere with the mining of it or prevent the burning of it. With our modern technology, yes, we can burn our coal within the limits of the Clean Air Act. I think, as technology improves, we'll be able to do even better with that.

The other thing is that we have only leased out and begun to explore 2 percent of our Outer Continental Shelf for oil, where it is believed by everyone familiar with that fuel and that source of energy that there are vast supplies yet to be found. Our Government has, in the last year or so, taken out of multiple use millions of acres of public lands that once were--well, they were public lands subject to multiple-use exploration for minerals and so forth. It is believed that probably 70 percent of the potential oil in the United States is probably hidden in those lands, and no one is allowed to even go and explore to find out if it is there. This is particularly true of the recent efforts to shut down part of Alaska.

Nuclear power: There were 36 powerplants planned in this country--and let me add the word "safety"; it must be done with the utmost of safety. But 32 of those have given up and canceled their plans to build, and again, because Government regulations and permits and so forth make it take more than twice as long to build a nuclear plant in the United States as it does to build one in Japan or in Western Europe.

We have the sources here. We are energy-rich, and coal is one of the great potentials we have.

MR. SMITH. President Carter, your comment?

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, sir. To repeat myself, we have this year the opportunity, which we'll realize, to produce 800 million tons of coal--an unequaled record in the history of our country. Governor Reagan says that this is not a good achievement, and he blames restraints on coal production on regulations--regulations that affect the life and the health and safety of miners and also regulations that protect the purity of our air and the quality of our water and our land. We cannot cast aside those regulations. We have a chance in the next 15 years, insisting upon the health and safety of workers in the mines, and also preserving the same high air and water pollution standards, to triple the amount of coal we produce.

Governor Reagan's approach to our energy policy, which has already proven its effectiveness, is to repeal or to change substantially the windfall profits tax, to return a major portion of $227 billion back to the oil companies, to do away with the Department of Energy, to shortcircuit our synthetic fuels program, to put a minimal emphasis on solar power, to emphasize strongly nuclear powerplants as a major source of energy in the future. He wants to put all our eggs in one basket and give that basket to the major oil companies.
MR. SMITH. Governor Reagan.

GOVERNOR REAGAN. That is a misstatement, of course, of my position. I just happen to believe that free enterprise can do a better job of producing the things that people need than Government can. The Department of Energy has a multibillion-dollar budget, in excess of $10 billion. It hasn't produced a quart of oil or a lump of coal or anything else in the line of energy.

And for Mr. Carter to suggest that I want to do away with the safety laws and with the laws that pertain to clean water and clean air, and so forth as Governor of California, I took charge of passing the strictest air pollution laws in the United States--the strictest air quality law that has ever been adopted in the United States. And we created an OSHA, an occupational safety and health agency, for the protection of employees before the Federal Government had one in place. And to this day, not one of its decisions or rulings has ever been challenged.

So, I think some of those charges are missing the point. I am suggesting that there are literally thousands of unnecessary regulations that invade every facet of business, and indeed, very much of our personal lives, that are unnecessary; that Government can do without; that have added $130 billion to the cost of production in this country; and that are contributing their part to inflation. And I would like to see us a little more free, as we once were.

MR. SMITH. President Carter, another crack at that?

THE PRESIDENT. Sure. As a matter of fact, the air pollution standard laws that were passed in California were passed over the objections of Governor Reagan, and this is a very well known fact. Also, recently, when someone suggested that the Occupational Safety and Health Act should be abolished, Governor Reagan responded, "Amen."

The offshore drilling rights is a question that Governor Reagan raises often. As a matter of fact, in the proposal for the Alaska lands legislation, 100 percent of all the offshore lands would be open for exploration, and 95 percent of all the Alaska lands where it is suspected or believed that minerals might exist. We have, with our 5-year plan for the leasing of offshore lands, proposed more land to be drilled than has been opened up for drilling since this program first started in 1954.

So, we're not putting restraints on American exploration; we're encouraging it in every way we can.

MR. SMITH. Governor Reagan, you have the last word on this question.

GOVERNOR REAGAN. Yes. If it is a wellknown fact that I opposed air pollution laws in California, the only thing I can possibly think of is that the President must be suggesting the law that the Federal Government tried to impose on the State of California--not a law, regulations that would have made it impossible to drive an automobile within the city limits of any California city, or have a place to put it if you did drive it against their regulations. It would have destroyed the economy of California, and, I must say, we had the support of Congress when pointed out how ridiculous this attempt was by the Environmental Protection Agency. We still have the strictest air control or air pollution laws in the country.

As for offshore oiling, only 2 percent now is so leased and is producing oil. The rest, as to whether the lands are going to be opened in the next 5 years or so--we're already 5 years behind in what we should be doing. There is more oil now in the wells that have been drilled than has been taken out in the 121 years that they've been drilled.
MR. SMITH. Thank you, Governor.
Thank you, Mr. President.

The next question goes to Governor Reagan from William Hilliard.

SOCIAL SECURITY
MR. HILLIARD. Governor Reagan, wage earners in this country--especially the young--are supporting a social security system that continues to affect their income drastically. The system is fostering a struggle between the young and the old, and is drifting the country toward a polarization of these two groups. How much longer can the young wage earner expect to bear the ever-increasing burden of the social security system?

GOVERNOR REAGAN. The social security system was based on a false premise, with regard to how fast the number of workers would increase and how fast the number of retirees would increase. It is actuarially out of balance, and this first became evident about 16 years ago, and some of us were voicing warnings then. Now, it is trillions of dollars out of balance, and the only answer that has come so far is the biggest single tax increase in our Nation's history, the payroll tax increase for social security, which will only put a Band-aid on this and postpone the day of reckoning by a few years at most.

What is needed is a study that I have proposed by a task force of experts to look into this entire problem as to how it can be reformed and made actuarially sound, but with the premise that no one presently dependent on social security is going to have the rug pulled out from under them and not get their check. We cannot frighten, as we have with the threats and the campaign rhetoric that has gone on in this campaign, our senior citizens, leave them thinking that in some way they're endangered and they would have no place to turn. They must continue to get those checks, and I believe that the system can be put on a sound actuarial basis. But it's going to take some study and some work, and not just passing a tax increase to let the roof fall in on the next administration.

MR. SMITH. Would you repeat that question for President Carter?

MR. HILLIARD. Yes, President Carter. Wage earners in this country, especially the young, are supporting a social security system that continues to affect their income drastically. The system is fostering a struggle between young and old and is drifting the country toward a polarization of these two groups. How much longer can the young wage earner expect to bear the ever-increasing burden of the social security system

THE PRESIDENT. As long as there's a Democratic President in the White House, we will have a strong and viable social security system, free of the threat of bankruptcy. Although Governor Reagan has changed his position lately, on four different occasions he has advocated making social security a voluntary system, which would, in effect, very quickly bankrupt it. I noticed also in the Wall Street Journal earlier this week that a preliminary report of his task force advocates making social security more sound by reducing the adjustments in social security for the retired people to compensate for the impact of inflation. These kinds of approaches are very dangerous to the security and the well-being, and the peace of mind of the retired people of this country and those approaching retirement age.

But no matter what it takes in the future to keep social security sound, it must be kept that way. And although there was a serious threat to the social security system and its integrity during the 1976 campaign and when I became President, the action of the Democratic Congress, working with me, has been to put social security back on a sound financial basis. That's the way it will stay

MR. SMITH. Governor Reagan.

GOVERNOR REAGAN. Well, that just isn't true. It has, as I said, delayed the actuarial imbalance falling on us for just a few years with that increase in taxes. And I don't believe we can go on increasing the tax, because the problem for the young people today is that they're paying in far more than they can ever expect to get out.

Now, again this statement that somehow I wanted to destroy it, and I just changed my tune, that I am for voluntary social security, which would mean the ruin of it. Mr. President, the voluntary thing that I suggested many years ago was that a young man, orphaned and raised by an aunt who died, his aunt was ineligible for social security insurance, because she was not his mother. And I suggested that if this is an insurance program, certainly the person who's paying in should be able to name his own beneficiaries. And that's the closest I've ever come to anything voluntary with social security. I, too, am pledged to a social security program that will reassure these senior citizens of ours they're going to continue to get their money.

Them are some changes I'd like to make. I would like to make a change that discriminates in the regulations against a wife who works and finds that she then is faced with a choice between her husband's benefits, if he dies first, or what she has paid in; but it does not recognize that she has also been paying in herself, and she is entitled to more than she presently can get. I'd like to change that.
MR. SMITH. President Carter's rebuttal now.

THE PRESIDENT. Fine. These constant suggestions that the basic social security system should be changed does cause concern and consternation among the aged of our country. It's obvious that we should have a commitment to them, that social security benefits should not be taxed, and that there would be no peremptory change in the standards by which social security payments are made to the retired people. We also need to continue to index the social security payments so that if inflation rises, the social security payments would rise a commensurate degree to let the buying power of the social security check continue intact.

In the past, the relationship between social security and Medicare has been very important to provide some modicum of aid for senior citizens in the retention of health benefits. Governor Reagan, as a matter of fact, began his political career campaigning around this Nation against Medicare. Now we have an opportunity to move toward national health insurance, with an emphasis on the prevention of disease; an emphasis on outpatient care, not inpatient care; an emphasis on hospital cost containment to hold down the cost of hospital care for those who are ill; an emphasis on catastrophic health insurance, so that if a family is threatened with being wiped out economically because of a very high medical bill, then the insurance would help pay for it. These are the kind of elements of a national health insurance, important to the American people. Governor Reagan, again, typically is against such a proposal.
MR. SMITH. Governor.

GOVERNOR REAGAN. There you go again. [Laughter]

When I opposed Medicare, there was another piece of legislation meeting the same problem before the Congress. I happened to favor the other piece of legislation and thought that it would be better for the senior citizens and provide better care than the one that was finally passed. I was not opposing the principle of providing care for them. I was opposing one piece of legislation as versus another.

There is something else about social security--of course, that doesn't come out of the payroll tax; it comes out of the general fund--that something should be done about. I think it's disgraceful that the Disability Insurance Fund in social security finds checks going every month to tens of thousands of people who are locked up in our institutions for crime or for mental illness, and they are receiving disability checks from social security every month while a State institution provides for all of their needs and their care.

MR. SMITH. President Carter, you have the last word on this question.

THE PRESIDENT. I think this debate on social security, Medicare, national health insurance typifies as vividly as any other subject tonight the basic historical differences between the Democratic Party and the Republican Party. The allusions to basic changes in the minimum wage is another, and the deleterious comments that Governor Reagan has made about unemployment compensation. These commitments that the Democratic Party has historically made to the working families of this Nation have been extremely important to the growth in their stature and in a better quality of life for them.

I noticed recently that Governor Reagan frequently quotes Democratic Presidents, in his acceptance address and otherwise. I have never heard a candidate for President, who is a Republican, quote a Republican President, but when they get in office, they try to govern like Republicans. So, its good for the American people to remember there is a sharp basic historical difference between Governor Reagan and me on these crucial issues-also, between the two parties that we represent.

MR. SMITH. Thank you, Mr. President, Governor Reagan.

We now go to another question, a question to President Carter by Barbara Walters.

ASSESSMENTS OF OPPONENT

MS. WALTERS. Thank you.

You have addressed some of the major issues tonight, but the biggest issue in the minds of American voters is yourselves, your ability to lead this country. When many voters go into that booth just a week from today, they will be voting their gut instinct about you men.

You've already given us your reasons why people should vote for you. Now would you please tell us for this your final question, why they should not vote for your opponent, why his Presidency could be harmful to the Nation and, having examined both your opponent's record and the man himself, tell us his greatest weakness.

THE PRESIDENT. Barbara, reluctant as I am to say anything critical about Governor Reagan, I will try to answer your question. [Laughter]

First of all, there's the historical perspective that I just described. This is a contest between a Democrat in the mainstream of my party, as exemplified by the actions that I've taken in the Oval Office the last 4 years, as contrasted with Governor Reagan, who in most cases does typify his party, but in some cases, there is a radical departure by him from the heritage of Eisenhower and others. The most important crucial difference in this election campaign, in my judgment, is the approach to the control of nuclear weaponry and the inclination to control or not to control the spread of atomic weapons to other nations that don't presently have it, particularly the terrorist nations.

The inclination that Governor Reagan has exemplified in many troubled times since he's been running for President--I think since 1968--to inject American military forces in places like North Korea, to put a blockade around Cuba this year, or in some instances, to project American forces into a fishing dispute against the small nation of Ecuador on the west coast of South America--this is typical of his longstanding inclination, on the use of American power, not to resolve disputes diplomatically and peacefully, but to show that the exercise of military power is best proven by the actual use of it.

Obviously, no President wants war, and I certainly do not believe that Governor Reagan, if he were President, would want war. But a President in the Oval Office has to make a judgment on almost a daily basis about how to exercise the enormous power of our country for peace, through diplomacy, or in a careless way, in a belligerent attitude which has exemplified his attitudes in the past.

MR. SMITH. Barbara, would you repeat the question for Governor Reagan?

MS. WALTERS. Yes, thank you. Realizing that you may be equally reluctant to speak ill of your opponent, may I ask why people should not vote for your opponent, why his Presidency could be harmful to the Nation? And having examined both your opponent's record and the man himself, could you tell us his greatest weakness?

GOVERNOR REAGAN. Well, Barbara, I believe that there is a fundamental difference-and I think it has been evident in most of the answers that Mr. Carter has given tonight--that he seeks the solution to anything as another opportunity for a Federal Government program. I happen to believe that the Federal Government has usurped powers and autonomy and authority that belongs back at the State and local level--it has imposed on the individual freedoms of the people--and that there are more of these things that could be solved by the people themselves, if they were given a chance, or by the levels of government that were closer to them.

Now, as to why I should be and he shouldn't be, when he was a candidate in 1976, President Carter invented a thing he called the misery index. He added the rate of unemployment and the rate of inflation, and it came, at that time, to 12.5 under President Ford. And he said that no man with that size misery index had a right to seek reelection to the Presidency. Today, by his own decision, the misery index is in excess of 20 percent, and I think this must suggest something.

But when I have quoted a Democrat President, as the President says, I was a Democrat. I said many foolish things back in those days. [Laughter] But the President that I quoted had made a promise, a Democrat promise, and I quoted him because it was never kept. And today, you would find that that promise is at the very heart of what Republicanism represents in this country today. And that's why I believe there are going to be millions of Democrats that are going to vote with us this time around, because they too want that promise kept. It was a promise for less government and less taxes and more freedom for the people.
MR. SMITH. President Carter.

THE PRESIDENT. Yes. I mentioned the radical departure of Governor Reagan from the principles or ideals or historical perspective of his own party. I don't think this can be better illustrated than in the case with guaranteeing women equal rights under the Constitution of our Nation. For 40 years, the Republican Party platforms called for guaranteeing women equal rights with a constitutional amendment. Six predecessors of mine who served in the Oval Office called for this guarantee of women's rights. Governor Reagan and the new Republican Party has departed from this commitment--a very severe blow to the opportunity for women finally to correct discrimination under which they have suffered.

When a man and a woman do the same amount of work, a man gets paid a dollar; a woman only gets paid 59 cents. And the equal rights amendment only says that equality of rights shall not be abridged for women by the Federal Government or by the State governments. That's all it says--a simple guarantee of equality of opportunity which typifies the Democratic Party and which is a very important commitment of mine, as contrasted with Governor Reagan's radical departure from the longstanding policy of his own party.

MR. SMITH. Governor Reagan.

GOVERNOR REAGAN. Yes. Mr. President, once again, I happen to be against the amendment, because I think the amendment will take this problem out of the hands of elected legislators and put it in the hands of unelected judges. I am for equal rights, and while you have been in office for 4 years, and not one single State--and most of them have a majority of Democratic legislators has added to the ratification or voted to ratify the equal rights amendment.

While I was Governor, more than 8 years ago, I found 14 separate instances where women were discriminated against in the body of California law, and I had passed and signed into law 14 statutes that eliminated those discriminations, including the economic ones that you have just mentioned, equal pay and so forth. I believe that if in all these years that we've spent trying to get the amendment, that we'd spent as much time correcting these laws, as we did in California--and we were the first to do it.

If I were President, I would also now take a look at the hundreds of Federal regulations which discriminate against women and which go right on while everyone is looking for an amendment. I would have someone ride herd on those regulations, and we'd start eliminating those discriminations in the Federal Government against women.
MR. SMITH. President Carter.

THE PRESIDENT. Yes. Howard, I'm a southerner, and I share the basic beliefs of my region about an excessive government intrusion into the private affairs of American citizens and also into the private affairs of the free enterprise system. One of the commitments that I made was to deregulate the major industries of this country. We've been remarkably successful, with the help of the Democratic Congress. We've deregulated the air industry, the rail industry, the trucking industry, financial institutions; now working on the communications industry.

In addition to that, I believe this element of discrimination is something that the South has seen so vividly as a blight on our region of the country which has now been corrected--not only racial discrimination but discrimination against people that have to work for a living--because we have been trying to pick ourselves up by our bootstraps since the long Depression years and lead a full and useful life in the affairs of this country. We've made remarkable success. It's part of my consciousness and of my commitment to continue this progress.

So, my heritage as a southerner, my experience in the Oval Office, convinces me that what I've just described is a proper course for the future.

MR. SMITH. Governor Reagan, yours is the last word.

GOVERNOR REAGAN. Well, my last word is again to say that we were talking about this very simple amendment and women's rights. And I make it plain again: I am for women's rights. But I would like to call the attention of the people to the fact that so-called simple amendment could be used by mischievous men to destroy discriminations that properly belong, by law, to women, respecting the physical differences between the two sexes, labor laws that protect them against doing things that would be physically harmful to them. Those could all be challenged by men. And the same would be true with regard to combat service in the military and so forth.

I thought that was the subject we were supposed to be on. But, if we're talking about how much we think about the working people and so forth, I'm the only fellow that ever ran for this job who was six times president of his own union and still has a lifetime membership in that union.

MR. SMITH. Gentlemen, each of you now have 3 minutes for a closing statement. President Carter, you're first.

CLOSING STATEMENTS

THE PRESIDENT. First of all, I'd like to thank the League of Women Voters for making this debate possible. I think it's been a very constructive debate, and I hope it's helped to acquaint the American people with the sharp differences between myself and Governor Reagan. Also, I want to thank the people of Cleveland and Ohio for being such hospitable hosts during this last few hours in my life.

I've been President now for almost 4 years. I've had to make thousands of decisions, and each one of those decisions has been a learning process. I've seen the strength of my Nation, and I've seen the crises that it approached in a tentative way. And I've had to deal with those crises as best I could.

As I've studied the record between myself and Governor Reagan, I've been impressed with the stark differences that exist between us. I think the results of this debate indicate that that fact is true. I consider myself in the mainstream of my party. I consider myself in the mainstream even of the bipartisan list of Presidents who've served before me. The United States must be a nation strong; the United States must be a nation secure. We must have a society that's just and fair. And we must extend the benefits of our own commitment to peace, to create a peaceful world.

I believe that since I've been in office, there've been six or eight areas of combat evolve in other parts of the world. In each case, I alone have had to determine the interests of my country and the degree of involvement of my country. I've done that with moderation, with care, with thoughtfulness; sometimes consulting experts. But I've learned in this last 3 1/2 years that when an issue is extremely difficult, when the call is very close, the chances are the experts will be divided almost 50-50. And the final judgment about the future of our Nation--war, peace, involvement, reticence, thoughtfulness, care, consideration, concern--has to be made by the man in the Oval Office. It's a lonely job, but with the involvement of the American people in the process, with an open government, the job is a very gratifying one.

The American people now are facing, next Tuesday, a lonely decision. Those listening to my voice will have to make a judgment about the future of this country. And I think they ought to remember that one vote can make a lot of difference. If one vote per precinct had changed in 1960, John Kennedy would never have been President of this Nation. And if a few more people had gone to the polls and voted in 1968, Hubert Humphrey would have been President; Richard Nixon would not.

There is a partnership involved. And our Nation, to stay strong, to stay at peace, to raise high the banner of human rights, to set an example for the rest of the world, to let our deep beliefs and commitments be felt by others in all other nations is my plan for the future. I ask the American people to join me in this partnership.

MR. SMITH. Governor Reagan.

GOVERNOR REAGAN. Yes, I would like to add my words of thanks, too, to the ladies of the League of Women Voters for making these debates possible. I'm sorry that we couldn't persuade the bringing in of the third candidate, so that he could have been seen also in these debates. But still, it's good that at least once, all three of us were heard by the people of this country.

Next Tuesday is election day. Next Tuesday all of you will go to the polls; you'll stand there in the polling place and make a decision. I think when you make that decision, it might be well if you would ask yourself, are you better off than you were 4 years ago? Is it easier for you to go and buy things in the stores than it was 4 years ago? Is there more or less unemployment in the country than there was 4 years ago? Is America as respected throughout the world as it was? Do you feel that our security is as safe, that we're as strong as we were 4 years ago? And if you answer all of those questions yes, why then, I think your choice is very obvious as to who you'll vote for. If you don't agree, if you don't think that this course that we've been on for the last 4 years is what you would like to see us follow for the next 4, then I could suggest another choice that you have.

This country doesn't have to be in the shape that it is in. We do not have to go on sharing in scarcity, with the country getting worse off, with unemployment growing. We talk about the unemployment lines. If all of the unemployed today were in a single line allowing 2 feet for each one of them, that line would reach from New York City to Los Angeles, California. All of this can be cured, and all of it can be solved.

I have not had the experience the President has had in holding that office, but I think in being Governor of California, the most populous State in the Union if it were a nation, it would be the seventh-ranking economic power in the world-I, too, had some lonely moments and decisions to make. I know that the economic program that I have proposed for this Nation in the next few years can resolve many of the problems that trouble us today. I know because we did it there. We cut the cost--the increased cost of government-the increase in half over the 8 years. We returned $5.7 billion in tax rebates, credits, and cuts to our people. We, as I've said earlier, fell below the national average in inflation when we did that. And I know that we did give back authority and autonomy to the people.

I would like to have a crusade today, and I would like to lead that crusade with your help. And it would be one to take government off the backs of the great people of this country and turn you loose again to do those things that I know you can do so well, because you did them and made this country great.
Thank you.

MR. SMITH. Gentlemen, ladies and gentlemen, for 60 years the League of Women Voters has been committed to citizen education and effective participation of Americans in governmental and political affairs. The most critical element of all in that process is an informed citizen who goes to the polls and who votes.

On behalf of the League of Women Voters, now, I would like to thank President Carter and Governor Reagan for being with us in Cleveland tonight. And, ladies and gentlemen, thank you and good night.

NOTE: The debate began at 9:30 p.m. in the Cleveland Convention Center Music Hall. It was broadcast live on radio and television.

Ruth J. Hinerfeld is chair of the League of Women Voters Education Fund, and Howard K. Smith is a correspondent with ABC News.

#
#Election Eve Address A Vision for America
#

The election will be over soon, autumn will become winter, this year will fade into next . . . and yet, the decisions we make tomorrow will determine our countrys course through what promises to be one of the most perilous decades in our history.

I know that tonight the fate of Americas 52 hostages is very much on the minds of all of us. Like you, there is nothing I want more than their safe return- -that they be reunited with their families after this long year of imprisonment.

When they have returned, all of us will be turning to the concerns that will determine the course of America in the next four years.

A child born this year will begin his or her adult life in what will be the 21st century. What kind of country, what kind of legacy will we leave to these young men and women who will live out Americas third century as a nation?

In thinking about these questions, many Americans seem to be wondering, searching. . . feeling frustrated and perhaps even a little afraid.

Many of us are unhappy about our worsening economic problems, about the constant crisis atmosphere in our foreign policy, about our diminishing prestige around the globe, about the weakness in our economy and national security that jeopardizes world peace, about our lack of strong, straight-forward leadership.

And many Americans today, just as they did 200 years ago, feel burdened, stifled and sometimes even oppressed by government that has grown too large, too bureaucratic, too wasteful, too unresponsive, too uncaring about people and their problems.

Americans, who have always known that excessive bureaucracy is the enemy of excellence and compassion, want a change in public lifea change that makes government work for people. They seek a vision of a better America, a vision of society that frees the energies and ingenuity of our people while it extends compassion to the lonely, the desperate, and the forgotten.

I believe we can embark on a new age of reform in this country and an era of national renewal. An era that will reorder the relationship between citizen and government, that will make government again responsive to people, that will revitalize the values of family, work, and neighborhood and that will restore our private and independent social institutions. These institutions always have served as both buffer and bridge between the individual and the stateand these institutions, not government, are the real sources of our economic and social progress as a people.

Thats why Ive said throughout this campaign that we must control and limit the growth of federal spending, that we must reduce tax rates to stimulate work and savings and investment. Thats why Ive said we can relieve labor and business of burdensome, unnecessary regulations and still maintain high standards of environmental and occupational safety. Thats why Ive said we can reduce the cost of government by eliminating billions lost to waste and fraud in the federal bureaucracya problem that is now an unrelenting national scandal. And because we are a Federation of sovereign states, we can restore the health and vitality of state and local governments by returning to them control over programs best run at those levels of government closer to the people. We can fight corruption while we work to bring into our government women and men of competence and high integrity.

This last pledge is particularly important. No person who understands the American presidency can possibly hope to make every decision or tend to every detail in the national government. But he can promise to bring to government the best leaders in this nation and put them to work for the American people.

During the past three months, many of these leaders have been workingas part of our transition processon ways to reform the federal bureaucracyto make it truly a partnership between people and government.

With their help and guidance, some of the reforms I will seek to implement, if elected, are:

--a new structuring of the presidential cabinet that will make cabinet officers the managers of the national administrationnot captives of the bureaucracy or special interests in the departments they are supposed to direct.

--businesslike revisions of federal auditing and management procedures. Such revisions are long overdue and will ultimately save billions in wasted tax dollars.

--appointment of a special ombudsman to work with labor and industry groups to strengthen needed federal regulations while eliminating those that are burdensome and unnecessarily costly.

--we would seek to put the Social Security system back on a sound financial footing so there can never be any question about its strength.

--the appointment of special panels of top law enforcement experts to deal with the menacing problems of organized crime, drug abuse and the corruption of public officials.

I realize these reforms provide an ambitious agenda for our nations in the next four years. But I believe each of these objectives can be achieved.

In accomplishing these goals, it will be imperative to establish a close working relationship with the new Congress. No objective will be more important to me, if I am elected president, than that of opening a new era of cooperation between the executive and legislative branches of government.

These are much more than promises made in an election campaign. When I first entered office as Governor of California, that state--which, if it were a nation, would be the seventh greatest economic power in the worldfaced many of the same problems that confront our nation today.

We brought into California government the best leaders from the private and public sectors. We cut the rate of government spending and provided billions in tax relief to our citizens. We brought the state back from bankruptcy by working closely with the legislature in constructing a welfare program that put cheaters off the rolls, reducing them by 350,000, while it increased benefits to the truly needy. The Urban Institute, a Washington non-profit scholarly foundation, recently referred to this program as a major policy success.

Thats why I am confident we can effect the reforms I have mentionedreforms that will get government off our backs, out of our pockets and up to the standards of decency and excellence envisioned by the founding fathers.

But beyond even these reformsas important as they arethere is something more, much more, that needs to be said tonight.

Thats why I want to talk with younot about campaign issuesbut about America, about us, you and me.

Not so long ago, we emerged from a world war. Turning homeward at last, we built a grand prosperity and hopedfrom our own success and plenty--to help others less fortunate.

Our peace was a tense and bitter one, but in those days the center seemed to hold.

Then came the hard years: riots and assassinations, domestic strife over the Vietnam War and in the last four years, drift and disaster in Washington.

It all seems a long way from a time when politics was a national passion and sometimes even fun.

A popular novel of the 60s ended prophetically with its description of a kindly, pleasant, greening land about to learn whether history still has a place for a nation so strangely composed of great ideals and uneasy compromise as she.

That is really the question before us tonight: for the first time in our memory many Americans are asking: does history still have a place for America, for her people, for her great ideals? There are some who answer no; that our energy is spent, our days of greatness at an end, that a great national malaise is upon us.

They say we must cut our expectations, conserve and withdraw, that we must tell our childrennot to dream as we once dreamed.

Last year I lost a friend who was more than a symbol of the Hollywood dream industry; to millions he was a symbol of our country itself. And when he died, the headlines seemed to convey all the doubt about America, all the nostalgia for a seemingly lost past.

The Last American Hero, said one headline, Mr. America dies, said another.

Well, I knew John Wayne well, and no one would have been angrier at being called the last American hero.

Just before his death, he said in his own blunt way, Just give the American people a good cause, and theres nothing they cant lick. Duke Wayne did not believe that our country was ready for the dust bin of history, and if well just think about it we too will know it isnt.

Have we forgotten that night several years ago when we waited through the long hours watching our TV screens for that first plane to land at Clark Field in the Philippines bearing our men who had been prisoners of the North Vietnamese? Finally the moment came. What would we see when that plane door opened? Those men had been imprisoned and tortured by savage captors for yearsas many as ten in some cases. The door opened, and we had our answer--Admiral Jeremiah Denton came down the ramp, saluted our countrys flag, thanked us for bringing them home and said, God Bless America.

I was Governor of California at the time, and Nancy and I were privileged to have many of the returned P.O.W.s in our home on four different occasions. We heard stories of incredible heroism and unbelievable horror told without bitterness or attempt at embellishment. We saw two men meet in our home, hear each others name and throw their arms around each otherthey were the closest of friends, knew every detail of each others life, but they were seeing each other face to face for the first time in their lives, there in our home. Their friendship had been built up over the years, tapping code on the wall that divided their solitary confinement cells.

One night after such an evening had ended, I asked Nancy, where did we find such men? The answer came to me as quickly as I had asked the question. We found them where weve always found them. In our shops, on our farms, on our city streets, in our villages and towns. They are just the product of the freest society the world has ever known.

There were astronauts Virgil Grissom, Ed White and Roger Chaffee who died as other Americans had died in opening new frontiers. Their courage was remembered when later the message came back to earth from other astronautsthe eagle has landed. Man had set foot on the moon.

These were not the deeds of men who set out to be heroes. In many ways they were ordinary Americans whose spontaneous response to time and circumstance gave us a glimpse into the soul of this country and enduring vigor of her people.

Do not mistake me, no reasonable man who sees the world as it is, who views the deterioration of our economy, the waning of our relationships with our allies, the growth of Soviet might and the sufferings of our recent past could underestimate the difficulties before us.

But I wonder if those who doubt America have forgotten that just as in the lives of individuals so too in the lives of nations: it is always when things seem most unbearablethat we must have faith that Americas trials have meaning beyond our own understanding.

Since her beginning America has held fast to this hope of divine providence, this vision of man with God.

It is true that world peace is jeopardized by those who view mannot as a noble beingbut as an accident of nature, without soul, and important only to the extent he can serve an all powerful state.

But it is our spiritual commitmentmore than all the military might in the worldthat will win our struggle for peace.

It is not bombs and rockets but belief and resolveit is humility before God that is ultimately the source of Americas strength as a nation

Our people always have held fast to this belief, this vision, since our first days as a nation.

I know I have told before of the moment in 1630 when the tiny ship Arabella bearing settlers to the New World lay off the Massachusetts coast. To the little bank of settlers gathered on the deck John Winthrop said: we shall be a city upon a hill. The eyes of all people are upon us, so that if we shall deal falsely with our God in this work we have undertaken and so cause him to withdraw his present help from us, we shall be made a story and a byword through the world.

Well, America became more than a story, or a bywordmore than a sterile footnote in history. I have quoted John Winthrops words more than once on the campaign trail this yearfor I believe that Americans in 1980 are every bit as committed to that vision of a shining city on a hill, as were those long ago settlers.

We celebrated our 200th anniversary as a nation a short time ago. Fireworks exploded over Boston harbor, Arthur Fiedler conducted, thousands cheered and waved Old Glory.

These were not just images of a bicentennial; they were reminders of our birthright of freedomand of generous, fervent patriotism that burns in America. A patriotism that shows itself sometimes in very unexpected places. Remember baseballs designated patriotRick Mondayan outfielder for the Chicago Cubs who on April 25, 1976, at Dodger Stadium grabbed our flag from two demonstrators who were trying to burn it in center fieldand as he came off the field to the dugout, carrying the flag, thousands stood and cheered and then found themselves singing God Bless America.

During this last year, I have had a chance to meet and talk on the campaign trail with Americans in every corner of the United States.

I find no national malaise, I find nothing wrong with the American people. Oh, they are frustrated, even angry at what has been done to this blessed land. But more than anything they are sturdy and robust as they have always been.

Any nation that sees softness in our prosperity or disunityin our sometimes noisy arguments with each otherlet such nations not make the mistakes others have madelet them understand that we will put aside in a moment the fruits of our prosperity and the luxury of our disagreements if the cause is a safe and peaceful future for our children.

Let it always be clear that we have no dreams of empire, that we seek no manifest destiny, that we understand the limitations of any one nations power.

But let it also be clear that we do not shirk historys call; that America is not turned inward but outwardtoward others. Let it be clear that we have not lessened our commitment to peace or to the hope that someday all of the people of the world will enjoy lives of decency, lives with a degree of freedom, with a measure of dignity.

Together, tonight, let us say what so many long to hear: that America is still united, still strong, still compassionate, still clinging fast to the dream of peace and freedom, still willing to stand by those who are persecuted or alone.

For those who seek the right to self-determination without interference from foreign powers, tonight let us speak for them,

For those who suffer from social or religious discrimination,

For those who are victims of police states or government induced torture or terror,

For those who are persecuted,

For all the countries and people of the world who seek only to live in harmony with each other, tonight let us speak for them.

And to our allieswho regard us with such constant puzzlement and profound affectionwe must also speak tonight.

To our Canadian neighbors who so recently rescued Americans in Teheran, to the people of Great Britain to whom ties of blood, language and culture bind so closely, to the people of France who midwifed our birth as a nation, to the people of Germany and Japan with whom we bound up the wounds of war, to the people of Ireland and Italy and all the ethnic communities whose national heritages have enriched this nation and become our own, to the people of Israel with whom we enjoy the closest of friendships, to the people of Latin America, Australia, the Philippines, Taiwan, Koreato all our allies great and small, we say tonight: at last the sleeping giant stirs and is filled with resolvea resolve that we will win together our struggle for world peaceour struggle for the human spirit.

And to the people of Africa, we say that we seek a lasting, just and close relationship.

To the people of China, with whom we have begun the first important steps to friendshiplet it be known to them that we mean for that friendship to bring our peoples closer together.

To the people of Russiaif only we could speak to them without their government intervening, they would know our willingness to build an enduring peace.

Tonight, my fellow Americans, we have reached deep into our national pastremembered the words and deeds of great men who have gone before us.

But before I close, I want to leave with you a speech by a man not so well remembered in history, but those words, spoken on the eve of our struggle for independence, should uplift and inspire now as surely as they did in 1775. Joseph Warren, a Boston doctor, left us these words before giving his life at Bunker Hill: Our country is in danger, but not to be despaired ofon you depend the fortunes of Americayou are to decide the important question, on which rests the happiness and liberty of millions yet unborn. Act worthy of yourselves.

Tomorrow morning, you will be making a choice between different visions of the future. Your decision is a uniquely personal one. It belongs to no one but you. It will be critical in determining the path we will follow in the years ahead.

If you feel that Mr. Carter has faithfully served America with the kind of competence and distinction which deserve four more years in office, then you should vote for him. If he has given you the kind of leadership you are looking for, if he instills in you pride for our country and a sense of optimism about our future, then he should be reelected.

But consider these questions as well when you finally make your decision:

Are you more confident that our economy will create productive work for our society or are you less confident? Do you feel you can keep the job you have or gain a job if you dont have one?

Are you satisfied that inflation as the highest rates in 33 years were the best that we could do? Are interest rates at 14 percent something you are prepared to live with?

Are you pleased with the ability of young people to buy a home; of the elderly to live their remaining years in happiness; of our youngsters to take pride in the world we have build for them?

Is our nation stronger and more capable of leading the world toward peace and freedom or is it weaker?

Is there more stability in the world or less?

Are you convinced that we have earned the respect of the world and our allies, or has Americas position across the globe diminished?

Are you personally more secure in your life? Is your family more secure? Is America safer in the world?

And, most importantly--quite simply--the basic question of our lives: are you happier today than when Mr. Carter became President of the United States?

I cannot answer those questions for you. Only you can.

It is autumn now in Washington, and the residents there say that more than ever during the past few years, Americans are coming to visit their capitalsome say because economic conditions rule out more expensive vacations elsewhere; some say an election year has heightened interest in the workings of the national government.

Others say something different: in a time when our values, when our place in history is so seriously questioned, they say Americans want their sons and daughters to see what is still for them and for so many other millions in the world a city offering the last best hope of man on earth!

You can see themthese Washington visitorslooking for the famous as they walk through congressional hallways; see them as they return silent and tightlipped to tour buses that brought them for a walk through rows of white crosses in Arlington Cemetery; you can see them as they look up at a towering statue of Jefferson or out from the top of the Washington Monument; or as they read the words inscribed at the Lincoln Memorial. Let us bind up the nations wounds.

These visitors to that city on the Potomac do not come as white or black, red or yellow; they are not Jews or Christians; conservatives or liberals; or Democrats or Republicans. They are Americans awed by what has gone before, proud of what for them is stilla shining city on a hill.

At this very moment, some young American, coming up along the Virginia or Maryland shores of the Potomac is seeing for the first time the lights that glow on the great halls of our government and the monuments to the memory of our great men.

Let us resolve tonight that young Americans will always see those Potomac lights; that they will always find there a city of hope in a country that is free. And let us resolve they will say of our day and our generation that we did keep faith with our God, that we did act worthy of ourselves; that we did protect and pass on lovingly that shining city on a hill.


